     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The King James Version of the Holy Bible
      Creator(s): Anonymous
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Bible; Old Testament; New Testament; Apocrypha
      LC Call no: BS185
     LC Subjects:

                  The Bible

                  Modern texts and versions

                  English
     __________________________________________________________________

Holy Bible

                               King James Version
     __________________________________________________________________

   TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD,


   KING OF GREAT BRITIAN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND,


   DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, ETC.


   THE TRANSLATORS OF THE BIBLE WISH GRACE, MERCY, AND PEACE,


   THROUGH JESUS CHRIST OUR Lord


   Great and manifold were the blessings, most dread Sovereign, which
   Almighty God, the Father of all mercies, bestowed upon us the people of
   England, when first he sent Your Majesty's Royal Person to rule and
   reign over us. For whereas it was the expectation of many, who wished
   not well unto our Sion, that, upon the setting of that bright
   Occindental Star, Queen Elizabeth, of most happy memory, some thick and
   palpable clouds of darkness would so have overshadowed this land, that
   men should have been in doubt which way they were to walk, and that it
   should hardly be known who was to direct the unsettled State; the
   appearance of Your Majesty, as of the Sun in his strength, instantly
   dispelled those supposed and surmised mists, and gave unto all that
   were well affected exceeding cause of comfort; especially when we
   beheld the Government established in Your Highness, and Your hopeful
   Seed, by an undoubted Title; and this also accompanied with peace and
   tranquillity at home and abroad.

   But among all of our joys, there was no one that more filled our hearts
   than the blessed continuance of the preaching of God's sacred Word
   among us, which is that inestimable treasure which excelleth all the
   riches of the earth; because the fruit thereof extendeth itself, not
   only to the time spent in this transitory world, but directeth and
   disposeth men unto that eternal happiness which is above in heaven.

   Then not to suffer this fall to the ground, but rather to take it up,
   and to continue it in that state wherein the famous Predecessor of Your
   Highness did leave it; nay, to go forward with the confidence and
   resolution of a man, in maintaining the truth of Christ, and
   propagating it far and near is that which hath so bound and firmly knit
   the hearts of all Your Majesty's loyal and religious people unto You,
   that Your very name is precious among them: their eye doth behold You
   with comfort, and they bless You in their hearts, as that sanctified
   Person, who, under God, is the immediate author of their true
   happiness. And this their contentment doth not diminish or decay, but
   every day increaseth and taketh strength, when they observe that the
   zeal of Your Majesty toward the house of God doth not slack or go
   backward, but is more and more kindled, manifesting itself abroad in
   the farthest parts of Christendom, by writing in defence of the truth,
   (which hath given such a blow unto that Man of Sin as will not be
   healed,) and every day at home, by religious and learned discourse, by
   frequenting the house of God, by hearing the Word preached, by
   cherishing the teachers thereof, by caring for the Church, as a most
   tender and loving nursing father.

   There are infinite arguments of this right Christian and religious
   affection in Your Majesty; but none is more forcible to declare it to
   others than the vehement and perpetuated desire of accomplishing and
   publishing of this work, which now, with all humility, we present unto
   Your Majesty. For when Your Highness had once, out of deep judgement,
   apprehended how convenient it was, that, out of the Original sacred
   Tongues, together with comparing of the labours, both in our own and
   other foreign languages, of many worthy men who went before us, there
   should be one more exact translation of the Holy Scriptures into the
   English tongue; Your Majesty did never desist to urge and to excite
   those to whom it was commended, that the Work might be hastened, and
   that the business might be expedited in so decent a manner, as a matter
   of such importance might justly require.

   And now at last, by the mercy of God, and the continuance of our
   labours, it being brought unto such a conclusion, as that we have great
   hopes that the Church of England shall reap good fruit thereby, we hold
   it our duty to offer it to Your Majesty, not only as to our King and
   Sovereign, but as to the principal mover and author of the Work; humbly
   craving of your most Sacred Majesty, that, since things of this quality
   have ever been subject to the censures of ill-meaning and discontented
   persons, it may receive approbation and patronage from so learned and
   judicious a Prince as Your Highness is; whose allowance and acceptance
   of our labours shall more honour and encourage us, than all the
   calumniations and hard interpretations of other men shall dismay us. So
   that if, on the one side, we shall be traduced by Popish persons at
   home or abroad, who therefore will malign us, because we are poor
   instruments to make God's holy truth to be yet more and more known unto
   the people, whom they desire still to keep in ignorance and darkness;
   or if, on the other side, we shall be maligned by self-conceited
   brethren, who run their own ways, and give liking unto nothing but what
   is framed by themselves, and hammered on their anvil, we may rest
   secure, supported within by the truth and innocency of a good
   conscience, having walked the ways of simplicity and integrity, as
   before the Lord, and sustained without by the powerful protection of
   Your Majesty's grace and favour, which will ever give countenance to
   honest and Christian endeavours against bitter censures and
   uncharitable imputations.

   The Lord of heaven and earth bless Your Majesty with many and happy
   days, that, as his heavenly hand hath enriched Your Highness with many
   singular and extraordinary graces, so You may be the wonder of the
   world in this latter age for happiness and true felicity, to the honour
   of that great God, and the good of his Church, through Jesus Christ our
   Lord and only Saviour.
     __________________________________________________________________

THE TRANSLATORS TO THE READER

  Preface to the King James Version of 1611

  THE BEST THINGS HAVE BEEN CULMINATED

   Zeal to promote the common good, whether it be by devising anything
   ourselves, or revising that which hath been laboured by others,
   deserveth certainly much respect and esteem, but yet findeth but cold
   entertainment in the world. It is welcomed with suspicion instead of
   love, and with emulation instead of thanks: and if there be any hole
   left for cavil to enter, (and cavil, if it do not find a hole, will
   make one) it is sure to be misconstrued, and in danger to be condemned.
   This will easily be granted by as many as know story, or have any
   experience. For, was there ever any-projected, that savoured any way of
   newness or renewing, but the same endured many a storm of gainsaying,
   or opposition? A man would think that Civility, wholesome Laws,
   learning and eloquence, Synods, and Church-maintenance, (that we speak
   of no more things of this kind) should be as safe as a Sanctuary, and
   out of shot, as they say, that no man would lift up the heel, no, nor
   dog move his tongue against the motioners of them. For by the first, we
   are distinguished from brute beasts lead with sensuality; By the
   second, we are bridled and restrained from outrageous behaviour, and
   from doing of injuries, whether by fraud or by violence; By the third,
   we are enabled to inform and reform others, by the light and feeling
   that we have attained unto ourselves; Briefly, by the fourth being
   brought together to a parley face to face, we sooner compose our
   differences than by writings which are endless; And lastly, that the
   Church be sufficiently provided for, is so agreeable to good reason and
   conscience, that those mothers are holden to be less cruel, that kill
   their children as soon as they are born, than those nursing fathers and
   mothers (wheresoever they be) that withdraw from them who hang upon
   their breasts (and upon whose breasts again themselves do hang to
   receive the Spiritual and sincere milk of the word) livelihood and
   support fit for their estates. Thus it is apparent, that these things
   which we speak of, are of most necessary use, and therefore, that none,
   either without absurdity can speak against them, or without note of
   wickedness can spurn against them.

   Yet for all that, the learned know that certain worthy men [Anacharsis
   with others] have been brought to untimely death for none other fault,
   but for seeking to reduce their Countrymen to god order and discipline;
   and that in some Commonwealths [e.g. Locri] it was made a capital
   crime, once to motion the making of a new Law for the abrogating of an
   old, though the same were most pernicious; And that certain [Cato the
   elder], which would be counted pillars of the State, and patterns of
   Virtue and Prudence, could not be brought for a long time to give way
   to good Letters and refined speech, but bare themselves as averse from
   them, as from rocks or boxes of poison; And fourthly, that he was no
   babe, but a great clerk [Gregory the Divine], that gave forth (and in
   writing to remain to posterity) in passion peradventure, but yet he
   gave forth, that he had not seen any profit to come by any Synod, or
   meeting of the Clergy, but rather the contrary; And lastly, against
   Church-maintenance and allowance, in such sort, as the Ambassadors and
   messengers of the great King of Kings should be furnished, it is not
   unknown what a fiction or fable (so it is esteemed, and for no better
   by the reporter himself [Nauclerus], though superstitious) was devised;
   Namely, that at such a time as the professors and teachers of
   Christianity in the Church of Rome, then a true Church, were liberally
   endowed, a voice forsooth was heard from heaven, saying: Now is poison
   poured down into the Church, etc. Thus not only as oft as we speak, as
   one saith, but also as oft as we do anything of note or consequence, we
   subject ourselves to everyone's censure, and happy is he that is least
   tossed upon tongues; for utterly to escape the snatch of them it is
   impossible. If any man conceit, that this is the lot and portion of the
   meaner sort only, and that Princes are privileged by their high estate,
   he is deceived. "As the sword devoureth as well one as the other," as
   it is in Samuel [2 Sam 11:25], nay as the great Commander charged his
   soldiers in a certain battle, to strike at no part of the enemy, but at
   the face; And as the King of Syria commanded his chief Captains to
   "fight neither with small nor great, save only against the King of
   Israel:" [1 Kings 22:31] so it is too true, that Envy striketh most
   spitefully at the fairest, and at the chiefest. David was a worthy
   Prince, and no man to be compared to him for his first deeds, and yet
   for as worthy as act as ever he did (even for bringing back the Ark of
   God in solemnity) he was scorned and scoffed at by his own wife [2 Sam
   6:16]. Solomon was greater than David, though not in virtue, yet in
   power: and by his power and wisdom he built a Temple to the Lord, such
   a one as was the glory of the land of Israel, and the wonder of the
   whole world. But was that his magnificence liked of by all? We doubt
   it. Otherwise, why do they lay it in his son's dish, and call unto him
   for easing the burden, "Make", say they, "the grievous servitude of thy
   father, and his sore yoke, lighter?" [1 Kings 12:4] Belike he had
   charged them with some levies, and troubled them with some carriages;
   Hereupon they raise up a tragedy, and wish in their heart the Temple
   had never been built. So hard a thing it is to please all, even when we
   please God best, and do seek to approve ourselves to every ones
   conscience.

   If we will descend to later times, we shall find many the like examples
   of such kind, or rather unkind acceptance. The first Roman Emperor [C.
   Caesar. Plutarch] did never do a more pleasing deed to the learned, nor
   more profitable to posterity, for conserving the record of times in
   true supputation; than when he corrected the Calendar, and ordered the
   year according to the course of the Sun; and yet this was imputed to
   him for novelty, and arrogance, and procured to him great obloguy. So
   the first Christened Emperor [Constantine] (at the least-wise that
   openly professed the faith himself, and allowed others to do the like)
   for strengthening the Empire at his great charges, and providing for
   the Church, as he did, got for his labour the name Pupillus, as who
   would say, a wasteful Prince, that had need of a Guardian or overseer
   [Aurel. Victor]. So the best Christened Emperor [Theodosius], for the
   love that he bare unto peace, thereby to enrich both himself and his
   subjects, and because he did not see war but find it, was judged to be
   no man at arms [Zosimus], (though indeed he excelled in feats of
   chivalry, and showed so much when he was provoked) and condemned for
   giving himself to his ease, and to his pleasure. To be short, the most
   learned Emperor of former times [Justinian], (at the least, the
   greatest politician) what thanks had he for cutting off the
   superfluities of the laws, and digesting them into some order and
   method? This, that he had been blotted by some to be an Epitomist, that
   is, one that extinguishes worthy whole volumes, to bring his
   abridgments into request. This is the measure that hath been rendered
   to excellent Princes in former times, even, Cum bene facerent, male
   audire, For their good deeds to be evil spoken of. Neither is there any
   likelihood, that envy and malignity died, and were buried with the
   ancient. No, no, the reproof of Moses taketh hold of most ages; "You
   are risen up in your fathers' stead, and increase of sinful men." [Num
   32:14] "What is that that hath been done? that which shall be done; and
   there is no new thing under the Sun," saith the wiseman: [Ecc 1:9] and
   S. Stephen, "As your fathers did, so do you." [Acts 7:51]

    HIS MAJESTY'S CONSTANCY, NOTWITHSTANDING CULMINATION, FOR THE SURVEY OF THE
    ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

   This, and more to this purpose, His Majesty that now reigneth (and
   long, and long may he reign, and his offspring forever, "Himself and
   children, and children's always) knew full well, according to the
   singular wisdom given unto him by God, and the rare learning and
   experience that he hath attained unto; namely that whosoever attempteth
   anything for the public (especially if it pertain to Religion, and to
   the opening and clearing of the word of God) the same setteth himself
   upon a stage to be gloated upon by every evil eye, yea, he casteth
   himself headlong upon pikes, to be gored by every sharp tongue. For he
   that medleth with men's Religion in any part, medleth with their
   custom, nay, with their freehold; and though they find no content in
   that which they have, yet they cannot abide to hear of altering.
   Notwithstanding his Royal heart was not daunted or discouraged for this
   that colour, but stood resolute, "as a statue immovable, and an anvil
   not easy to be beaten into plates," as one [Suidas] saith; he knew who
   had chosen him to be a Soldier, or rather a Captain, and being assured
   that the course which he intended made for the glory of God, and the
   building up of his Church, he would not suffer it to be broken off for
   whatsoever speeches or practices. It doth certainly belong unto Kings,
   yea, it doth specially belong unto them, to have care of Religion, yea,
   it doth specially belong unto them, to have care of Religion, yea, to
   know it aright, yea, to profess it zealously, yea to promote it to the
   uttermost of their power. This is their glory before all nations which
   mean well, and this will bring unto them a far most excellent weight of
   glory in the day of the Lord Jesus. For the Scripture saith not in
   vain, "Them that honor me, I will honor," [1 Sam 2:30] neither was it a
   vain word that Eusebius delivered long ago, that piety towards God was
   the weapon and the only weapon, that both preserved Constantine's
   person, and avenged him of his enemies [Eusebius lib 10 cap 8].

    THE PRAISE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES

   But now what piety without truth? what truth (what saving truth)
   without the word of God? What word of God (whereof we may be sure)
   without the Scripture? The Scriptures we are commanded to search. John
   5:39. Isa 8:20. They are commended that searched and studied them. Acts
   17:11 and 8:28,29. They are reproved that were unskillful in them, or
   slow to believe them. Matt 22:29. Luke 24:25. They can make us wise
   unto salvation. 2 Tim 3:15. If we be ignorant, they will instruct us;
   if out of the way, they will bring us home; if out of order, they will
   reform us; if in heaviness, comfort us; if dull, quicken us; if cold,
   inflame us. Tolle, lege; Tolle, lege, Take up and read, take up and
   read the Scriptures [S. August. confess. lib 8 cap 12], (for unto them
   was the direction) it was said unto S. Augustine by a supernatural
   voice. "Whatsoever is in the Scriptures, believe me," saith the same S.
   Augustine, "is high and divine; there is verily truth, and a doctrine
   most fit for the refreshing of men's minds, and truly so tempered, that
   everyone may draw from thence that which is sufficient for him, if he
   come to draw with a devout and pious mind, as true Religion requireth."
   [S. August. de utilitcredendi cap. 6] Thus S. Augustine. and S. Jerome:
   "Ama scripturas, et amabit te sapientia etc." [S. Jerome. ad Demetriad]
   Love the Scriptures, and wisdom will love thee. And S. Cyril against
   Julian; "Even boys that are bred up in the Scriptures, become most
   religious, etc. [S. Cyril. 7 contra Iulianum] But what mention we three
   or four uses of the Scripture, whereas whatsoever is to be believed or
   practiced, or hoped for, is contained in them? or three or four
   sentences of the Fathers, since whosoever is worthy the name of a
   Father, from Christ's time downward, hath likewise written not only of
   the riches, but also of the perfection of the Scripture? "I adore the
   fulness of the Scripture," saith Tertullian against Hermogenes.
   [Tertul. advers. Hermo.] And again, to Apelles an heretic of the like
   stamp, he saith; "I do not admit that which thou bringest in (or
   concludest) of thine own (head or store, de tuo) without Scripture."
   [Tertul. de carne Christi.] So Saint Justin Martyr before him; "We must
   know by all means," saith he, "that it is not lawful (or possible) to
   learn (anything) of God or of right piety, save only out of the
   Prophets, who teach us by divine inspiration." So Saint Basil after
   Tertullian, "It is a manifest falling way from the Faith, and a fault
   of presumption, either to reject any of those things that are written,
   or to bring in (upon the head of them) any of those things that are not
   written. We omit to cite to the same effect, S. Cyril B. of Jerusalem
   in his 4::Cataches., Saint Jerome against Helvidius, Saint Augustine in
   his 3::book against the letters of Petilian, and in very many other
   places of his works. Also we forebear to descend to later Fathers,
   because we will not weary the reader. The Scriptures then being
   acknowledged to be so full and so perfect, how can we excuse ourselves
   of negligence, if we do not study them, of curiosity, if we be not
   content with them? Men talk much of [an olive bow wrapped about with
   wood, whereupon did hang figs, and bread, honey in a pot, and oil], how
   many sweet and goodly things it had hanging on it; of the Philosopher's
   stone, that it turned copper into gold; of Cornucopia, that it had all
   things necessary for food in it, of Panaces the herb, that it was good
   for diseases, of Catholicon the drug, that it is instead of all purges;
   of Vulcan's armor, that it was an armor of proof against all thrusts,
   and all blows, etc. Well, that which they falsely or vainly attributed
   to these things for bodily god, we may justly and with full measure
   ascribe unto the Scripture, for spiritual. It is not only an armor, but
   also a whole armory of weapons, both offensive and defensive; whereby
   we may save ourselves and put the enemy to flight. It is not an herb,
   but a tree, or rather a whole paradise of trees of life, which bring
   forth fruit every month, and the fruit thereof is for meat, and the
   leaves for medicine. It is not a pot of Manna, or a cruse of oil, which
   were for memory only, or for a meal's meat or two, but as it were a
   shower of heavenly bread sufficient for a whole host, be it never so
   great; and as it were a whole cellar full of oil vessels; whereby all
   our necessities may be provided for, and our debts discharged. In a
   word, it is a Panary of wholesome food, against fenowed traditions; a
   Physician's shop (Saint Basil called it) [S. Basil in Psal. primum.] of
   preservatives against poisoned heresies; a Pandect of profitable laws,
   against rebellious spirits; a treasury of most costly jewels, against
   beggarly rudiments; finally a fountain of most pure water springing up
   unto everlasting life. And what marvel? The original thereof being from
   heaven, not from earth; the author being God, not man; the inditer, the
   holy spirit, not the wit of the Apostles or Prophets; the Penmen such
   as were sanctified from the womb, and endued with a principal portion
   of God's spirit; the matter, verity, piety, purity, uprightness; the
   form, God's word, God's testimony, God's oracles, the word of truth,
   the word of salvation, etc.; the effects, light of understanding,
   stableness of persuasion, repentance from dead works, newness of life,
   holiness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost; lastly, the end and reward of
   the study thereof, fellowship with the Saints, participation of the
   heavenly nature, fruition of an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and
   that never shall fade away: Happy is the man that delighted in the
   Scripture, and thrice happy that meditateth in it day and night.

    TRANSLATION NECESSARY

   But how shall men meditate in that, which they cannot understand? How
   shall they understand that which is kept close in an unknown tongue? as
   it is written, "Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be to him
   that speaketh, a Barbarian, and he that speaketh, shall be a Barbarian
   to me." [1 Cor 14] The Apostle excepteth no tongue; not Hebrew the
   ancientest, not Greek the most copious, not Latin the finest. Nature
   taught a natural man to confess, that all of us in those tongues which
   we do not understand, are plainly deaf; we may turn the deaf ear unto
   them. The Scythian counted the Athenian, whom he did not understand,
   barbarous; [Clem. Alex. 1 Strom.] so the Roman did the Syrian, and the
   Jew (even S. Jerome himself called the Hebrew tongue barbarous, belike
   because it was strange to so many) [S. Jerome. Damaso.] so the Emperor
   of Constantinople [Michael, Theophili fil.] calleth the Latin tongue,
   barbarous, though Pope Nicolas do storm at it: [2::Tom. Concil. ex
   edit. Petri Crab] so the Jews long before Christ called all other
   nations, Lognazim, which is little better than barbarous. Therefore as
   one complaineth, that always in the Senate of Rome, there was one or
   other that called for an interpreter: [Cicero 5::de finibus.] so lest
   the Church be driven to the like exigent, it is necessary to have
   translations in a readiness. Translation it is that openeth the window,
   to let in the light; that breaketh the shell, that we may eat the
   kernel; that putteth aside the curtain, that we may look into the most
   Holy place; that removeth the cover of the well, that we may come by
   the water, even as Jacob rolled away the stone from the mouth of the
   well, by which means the flocks of Laban were watered [Gen 29:10].
   Indeed without translation into the vulgar tongue, the unlearned are
   but like children at Jacob's well (which is deep) [John 4:11] without a
   bucket or something to draw with; or as that person mentioned by
   Isaiah, to whom when a sealed book was delivered, with this motion,
   "Read this, I pray thee," he was fain to make this answer, "I cannot,
   for it is sealed." [Isa 29:11]

    THE TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT OUT OF THE HEBREW INTO GREEK

   While God would be known only in Jacob, and have his Name great in
   Israel, and in none other place, while the dew lay on Gideon's fleece
   only, and all the earth besides was dry; then for one and the same
   people, which spake all of them the language of Canaan, that is,
   Hebrew, one and the same original in Hebrew was sufficient. [S. August.
   lib 12 contra Faust c32] But, when the fulness of time drew near, that
   the Sun of righteousness, the Son of God should come into the world,
   whom God ordained to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood,
   not of the Jew only, but also of the Greek, yea, of all them that were
   scattered abroad; then lo, it pleased the Lord to stir up the spirit of
   a Greek Prince (Greek for descent and language) even of Ptolemy
   Philadelph King of Egypt, to procure the translating of the Book of God
   out of Hebrew into Greek. This is the translation of the Seventy
   Interpreters, commonly so called, which prepared the way for our
   Saviour among the Gentiles by written preaching, as Saint John Baptist
   did among the Jews by vocal. For the Grecians being desirous of
   learning, were not wont to suffer books of worth to lie moulding in
   Kings' libraries, but had many of their servants, ready scribes, to
   copy them out, and so they were dispersed and made common. Again, the
   Greek tongue was well known and made familiar to most inhabitants in
   Asia, by reason of the conquest that there the Grecians had made, as
   also by the Colonies, which thither they had sent. For the same causes
   also it was well understood in many places of Europe, yea, and of
   Africa too. Therefore the word of God being set forth in Greek,
   becometh hereby like a candle set upon a candlestick, which giveth
   light to all that are in the house, or like a proclamation sounded
   forth in the market place, which most men presently take knowledge of;
   and therefore that language was fittest to contain the Scriptures, both
   for the first Preachers of the Gospel to appeal unto for witness, and
   for the learners also of those times to make search and trial by. It is
   certain, that that Translation was not so sound and so perfect, but it
   needed in many places correction; and who had been so sufficient for
   this work as the Apostles or Apostolic men? Yet it seemed good to the
   holy Ghost and to them, to take that which they found, (the same being
   for the greatest part true and sufficient) rather than making a new, in
   that new world and green age of the Church, to expose themselves to
   many exceptions and cavillations, as though they made a Translations to
   serve their own turn, and therefore bearing a witness to themselves,
   their witness not to be regarded. This may be supposed to be some
   cause, why the Translation of the Seventy was allowed to pass for
   current. Notwithstanding, though it was commended generally, yet it did
   not fully content the learned, no not of the Jews. For not long after
   Christ, Aquila fell in hand with a new Translation, and after him
   Theodotion, and after him Symmachus; yea, there was a fifth and a sixth
   edition, the Authors whereof were not known. [Epiphan. de mensur. et
   ponderibus.] These with the Seventy made up the Hexapla and were
   worthily and to great purpose compiled together by Origen. Howbeit the
   Edition of the Seventy went away with the credit, and therefore not
   only was placed in the midst by Origen (for the worth and excellency
   thereof above the rest, as Epiphanius gathered) but also was used by
   the Greek fathers for the ground and foundation of their Commentaries.
   Yea, Epiphanius above named doeth attribute so much unto it, that he
   holdeth the Authors thereof not only for Interpreters, but also for
   Prophets in some respect [S. August. 2::de dectrin. Christian c. 15];
   and Justinian the Emperor enjoining the Jews his subjects to use
   especially the Translation of the Seventy, rendreth this reason
   thereof, because they were as it were enlightened with prophetical
   grace. Yet for all that, as the Egyptians are said of the Prophet to be
   men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit [Isa 31:3]; so
   it is evident, (and Saint Jerome affirmeth as much) [S. Jerome. de
   optimo genere interpret.] that the Seventy were Interpreters, they were
   not Prophets; they did many things well, as learned men; but yet as men
   they stumbled and fell, one while through oversight, another while
   through ignorance, yea, sometimes they may be noted to add to the
   Original, and sometimes to take from it; which made the Apostles to
   leave them many times, when they left the Hebrew, and to deliver the
   sense thereof according to the truth of the word, as the spirit gave
   them utterance. This may suffice touching the Greek Translations of the
   Old Testament.

    TRANSLATION OUT OF HEBREW AND GREEK INTO LATIN

   There were also within a few hundred years after CHRIST, translations
   many into the Latin tongue: for this tongue also was very fit to convey
   the Law and the Gospel by, because in those times very many Countries
   of the West, yea of the South, East and North, spake or understood
   Latin, being made Provinces to the Romans. But now the Latin
   Translations were too many to be all good, for they were infinite
   (Latini Interprets nullo modo numerari possunt, saith S. Augustine.)
   [S. Augustin. de doctr. Christ. lib 2 cap II]. Again they were not out
   of the Hebrew fountain (we speak of the Latin Translations of the Old
   Testament) but out of the Greek stream, therefore the Greek being not
   altogether clear, the Latin derived from it must needs be muddy. This
   moved S. Jerome a most learned father, and the best linguist without
   controversy, of his age, or of any that went before him, to undertake
   the translating of the Old Testament, out of the very fountain with
   that evidence of great learning, judgment, industry, and faithfulness,
   that he had forever bound the Church unto him, in a debt of special
   remembrance and thankfulness.

    THE TRANSLATING OF THE SCRIPTURE INTO THE VULGAR TONGUES

   Now through the Church were thus furnished with Greek and Latin
   Translations, even before the faith of CHRIST was generally embraced in
   the Empire; (for the learned know that even in S. Jerome's time, the
   Consul of Rome and his wife were both Ethnics, and about the same time
   the greatest part of the Senate also) [S. Jerome. Marcell.Zosim] yet
   for all that the godly-learned were not content to have the Scriptures
   in the Language which they themselves understood, Greek and Latin, (as
   the good Lepers were not content to fare well themselves, but
   acquainted their neighbors with the store that God had sent, that they
   also might provide for themselves) [2 Kings 7:9] but also for the
   behoof and edifying of the unlearned which hungered and thirsted after
   righteousness, and had souls to be saved as well as they, they provided
   Translations into the vulgar for their Countrymen, insomuch that most
   nations under heaven did shortly after their conversion, hear CHRIST
   speaking unto them in their mother tongue, not by the voice of their
   Minister only, but also by the written word translated. If any doubt
   hereof, he may be satisfied by examples enough, if enough will serve
   the turn. First S. Jerome saith, Multarum gentium linguis Scriptura
   ante translata, docet falsa esse quae addita sunt, etc. i.e. "The
   Scripture being translated before in the languages of many Nations,
   doth show that those things that were added (by Lucian and Hesychius)
   are false." [S. Jerome. praef. in 4::Evangel.] So S. Jerome in that
   place. The same Jerome elsewhere affirmeth that he, the time was, had
   set forth the translation of the Seventy suae linguae hominibus, i.e.,
   for his countrymen of Dalmatia [S. Jerome. Sophronio.] Which words not
   only Erasmus doth understand to purport, that S. Jerome translated the
   Scripture into the Dalmatian tongue, but also Sixtus Senensis [Six.
   Sen. lib 4], and Alphonsus a` Castro [Alphon. lb 1 ca 23] (that we
   speak of no more) men not to be excepted against by them of Rome, do
   ingenuously confess as much. So, S. Chrysostom that lived in S.
   Jerome's time, giveth evidence with him: "The doctrine of S. John
   [saith he] did not in such sort [as the Philosophers' did] vanish away:
   but the Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and infinite
   other nations being barbarous people translated it into their [mother]
   tongue, and have learned to be [true] Philosophers," he meaneth
   Christians. [S. Chrysost. in Johan. cap.I. hom.I.] To this may be added
   Theodoret, as next unto him, both for antiquity, and for learning. His
   words be these, "Every Country that is under the Sun, is full of these
   words (of the Apostles and Prophets) and the Hebrew tongue [he meaneth
   the Scriptures in the Hebrew tongue] is turned not only into the
   Language of the Grecians, but also of the Romans, and Egyptians, and
   Persians, and Indians, and Armenians, and Scythians, and Sauromatians,
   and briefly into all the Languages that any Nation useth. [Theodor. 5.
   Therapeut.] So he. In like manner, Ulfilas is reported by Paulus
   Diaconus and Isidor (and before them by Sozomen) to have translated the
   Scriptures into the Gothic tongue: [P. Diacon. li. 12.] John Bishop of
   Sevil by Vasseus, to have turned them into Arabic, about the year of
   our Lord 717; [Vaseus in Chron. Hispan.] Bede by Cistertiensis, to have
   turned a great part of them into Saxon: Efnard by Trithemius, to have
   abridged the French Psalter, as Beded had done the Hebrew, about the
   year 800: King Alfred by the said Cistertiensis, to have turned the
   Psalter into Saxon: [Polydor. Virg. 5 histor.] Methodius by Aventinus
   (printed at Ingolstadt) to have turned the Scriptures into Slavonian:
   [Aventin. lib. 4.] Valdo, Bishop of Frising by Beatus Rhenanus, to have
   caused about that time, the Gospels to be translated into Dutch rhythm,
   yet extant in the Library of Corbinian: [Circa annum 900. B. Rhenan.
   rerum German. lib 2.] Valdus, by divers to have turned them himself
   into French, about the year 1160: Charles the Fifth of that name,
   surnamed the Wise, to have caused them to be turned into French, about
   200 years after Valdus his time, of which translation there be many
   copies yet extant, as witnesseth Beroaldus. Much about that time, even
   in our King Richard the second's days, John Trevisa translated them
   into English, and many English Bibles in written hand are yet to be
   seen with divers, translated as it is very probable, in that age. So
   the Syrian translation of the New Testament is in most learned men's
   Libraries, of Widminstadius his setting forth, and the Psalter in
   Arabic is with many, of Augustinus Nebiensis' setting forth. So Postel
   affirmeth, that in his travel he saw the Gospels in the Ethiopian
   tongue; And Ambrose Thesius allegeth the Pslater of the Indians, which
   he testifieth to have been set forth by Potken in Syrian characters. So
   that, to have the Scriptures in the mother tongue is not a quaint
   conceit lately taken up, either by the Lord Cromwell in England,
   [Thuan.] or by the Lord Radevile in Polony, or by the Lord Ungnadius in
   the Emperor's dominion, but hath been thought upon, and put in practice
   of old, even from the first times of the conversion of any Nation; no
   doubt, because it was esteemed most profitable, to cause faith to grow
   in men's hearts the sooner, and to make them to be able to say with the
   words of the Psalms, "As we have heard, so we have seen." [Ps 48:8]

    THE UNWILLINGNESS OF OUR CHIEF ADVERSARIES, THAT THE SCRIPTURES SHOULD BE
    DIVULGED IN THE MOTHER TONGUE, ETC.

   Now the Church of Rome would seem at the length to bear a motherly
   affection towards her children, and to allow them the Scriptures in
   their mother tongue: but indeed it is a gift, not deserving to be
   called a gift, an unprofitable gift: [Sophecles] they must first get a
   licence in writing before they may use them, and to get that, they must
   approve themselves to their Confessor, that is, to be such as are, if
   not frozen in the dregs, yet soured with the leaven of their
   superstition. Howbeit, it seemed too much to Clement the Eighth that
   there should be any Licence granted to have them in the vulgar tongue,
   and therefore he overruleth and frustrateth the grant of Pius the
   Fourth. [See the observation (set forth by Clemen. His authority) upon
   the 4. rule of Pius the 4. his making in the index, lib. prohib. pag.
   15. ver. 5.] So much are they afraid of the light of the Scripture,
   (Lucifugae Scripturarum, as Tertulian speaketh) that they will not
   trust the people with it, no not as it is set forth by their own sworn
   men, no not with the Licence of their own Bishops and Inquisitors. Yea,
   so unwilling they are to communicate the Scriptures to the people's
   understanding in any sort, that they are not ashamed to confess, that
   we forced them to translate it into English against their wills. This
   seemeth to argue a bad cause, or a bad conscience, or both. Sure we
   are, that it is not he that hath good gold, that is afraid to bring it
   to the touchstone, but he that hath the counterfeit; [Tertul. de resur.
   carnis.] neither is it the true man that shunneth the light, but the
   malefactor, lest his deeds should be reproved [John 3:20]: neither is
   it the plaindealing Merchant that is unwilling to have the weights, or
   the meteyard brought in place, but he that useth deceit. But we will
   let them alone for this fault, and return to translation.

    THE SPEECHES AND REASONS, BOTH OF OUR BRETHREN, AND OF OUR ADVERSARIES
    AGAINST THIS WORK

   Many men's mouths have been open a good while (and yet are not stopped)
   with speeches about the Translation so long in hand, or rather perusals
   of Translations made before: and ask what may be the reason, what the
   necessity of the employment: Hath the Church been deceived, say they,
   all this while? Hath her sweet bread been mingled with leaven, here
   silver with dross, her wine with water, her milk with lime? (Lacte
   gypsum male miscetur, saith S. Ireney,) [S. Iren. 3. lib. cap. 19.] We
   hoped that we had been in the right way, that we had the Oracles of God
   delivered unto us, and that though all the world had cause to be
   offended and to complain, yet that we had none. Hath the nurse holden
   out the breast, and nothing but wind in it? Hath the bread been
   delivered by the fathers of the Church, and the same proved to be
   lapidosus, as Seneca speaketh? What is it to handle the word of God
   deceitfully, if this be not? Thus certain brethren. Also the
   adversaries of Judah and Jerusalem, like Sanballat in Nehemiah, mock,
   as we hear, both the work and the workmen, saying; "What do these weak
   Jews, etc. will they make the stones whole again out of the heaps of
   dust which are burnt? although they build, yet if a fox go up, he shall
   even break down their stony wall." [Neh 4:3] Was their Translation good
   before? Why do they now mend it? Was it not good? Why then was it
   obtruded to the people? Yea, why did the Catholics (meaning Popish
   Romanists) always go in jeopardy, for refusing to go to hear it? Nay,
   if it must be translated into English, Catholics are fittest to do it.
   They have learning, and they know when a thing is well, they can manum
   de tabula. We will answer them both briefly: and the former, being
   brethren, thus, with S. Jerome, "Damnamus veteres? Mineme, sed post
   priorum studia in domo Domini quod possums laboramus." [S. Jerome.
   Apolog. advers. Ruffin.] That is, "Do we condemn the ancient? In no
   case: but after the endeavors of them that were before us, we take the
   best pains we can in the house of God." As if he said, Being provoked
   by the example of the learned men that lived before my time, I have
   thought it my duty, to assay whether my talent in the knowledge of the
   tongues, may be profitable in any measure to God's Church, lest I
   should seem to laboured in them in vain, and lest I should be thought
   to glory in men, (although ancient,) above that which was in them. Thus
   S. Jerome may be thought to speak.

    A SATISFACTION TO OUR BRETHREN

   And to the same effect say we, that we are so far off from condemning
   any of their labors that travailed before us in this kind, either in
   this land or beyond sea, either in King Henry's time, or King Edward's
   (if there were any translation, or correction of a translation in his
   time) or Queen Elizabeth's of ever renowned memory, that we acknowledge
   them to have been raised up of God, for the building and furnishing of
   his Church, and that they deserve to be had of us and of posterity in
   everlasting remembrance. The judgment of Aristotle is worthy and well
   known: "If Timotheus had not been, we had not had much sweet music; but
   if Phrynis [Timotheus his master] had not been, we had not had
   Timotheus." Therefore blessed be they, and most honoured be their name,
   that break the ice, and giveth onset upon that which helpeth forward to
   the saving of souls. Now what can be more available thereto, than to
   deliver God's book unto God's people in a tongue which they understand?
   Since of a hidden treasure, and of a fountain that is sealed, there is
   no profit, as Ptolemy Philadelph wrote to the Rabbins or masters of the
   Jews, as witnesseth Epiphanius: [S. Epiphan. loco ante citato.] and as
   S. Augustine saith; "A man had rather be with his dog than with a
   stranger (whose tongue is strange unto him)." [S. Augustin. lib. 19. de
   civil. Dei. c. 7.] Yet for all that, as nothing is begun and perfected
   at the same time, and the later thoughts are thought to be the wiser:
   so, if we building upon their foundation that went before us, and being
   holpen by their labours, do endeavor to make that better which they
   left so good; no man, we are sure, hath cause to mislike us; they, we
   persuade ourselves, if they were alive, would thank us. The vintage of
   Abienzer, that strake the stroke: yet the gleaning of grapes of Ephraim
   was not to be despised. See Judges 8:2. Joash the king of Israel did
   not satisfy himself, till he had smitten the ground three times; and
   yet he offended the Prophet, for giving over then. [2 Kings 13:18-19]
   Aquila, of whom we spake before, translated the Bible as carefully, and
   as skilfully as he could; and yet he thought good to go over it again,
   and then it got the credit with the Jews, to be called accurately done,
   as Saint Jerome witnesseth. [S. Jerome. in Ezech. cap. 3.] How many
   books of profane learning have been gone over again and again, by the
   same translators, by others? Of one and the same book of Aristotle's
   Ethics, there are extant not so few as six or seven several
   translations. Now if this cost may be bestowed upon the gourd, which
   affordeth us a little shade, and which today flourisheth, but tomorrow
   is cut down; what may we bestow, nay what ought we not to bestow upon
   the Vine, the fruit whereof maketh glad the conscience of man, and the
   stem whereof abideth forever? And this is the word of God, which we
   translate. "What is the chaff to the wheat, saith the Lord?" [Jer
   23:28] Tanti vitreum, quanti verum margaritum (saith Tertullian,)
   [Tertul. ad Martyr.] if a toy of glass be of that reckoning with us,
   how ought we to value the true pearl? [Jerome. ad Salvin.] Therefore
   let no man's eye be evil, because his Majesty's is good; neither let
   any be grieved, that we have a Prince that seeketh the increase of the
   spiritual wealth of Israel (let Sanballats and Tobiahs do so, which
   therefore do bear their just reproof) but let us rather bless God from
   the ground of our heart, for working this religious care in him, to
   have the translations of the Bible maturely considered of and examined.
   For by this means it cometh to pass, that whatsoever is sound already
   (and all is sound for substance, in one or other of our editions, and
   the worst of ours far better than their authentic vulgar) the same will
   shine as gold more brightly, being rubbed and polished; also, if
   anything be halting, or superfluous, or not so agreeable to the
   original, the same may be corrected, and the truth set in place. And
   what can the King command to be done, that will bring him more true
   honour than this? and wherein could they that have been set a work,
   approve their duty to the King, yea their obedience to God, and love to
   his Saints more, than by yielding their service, and all that is within
   them, for the furnishing of the work? But besides all this, they were
   the principal motives of it, and therefore ought least to quarrel it:
   for the very Historical truth is, that upon the importunate petitions
   of the Puritans, at his Majesty's coming to this Crown, the Conference
   at Hampton Court having been appointed for hearing their complaints:
   when by force of reason they were put from other grounds, they had
   recourse at the last, to this shift, that they could not with good
   conscience subscribe to the Communion book, since it maintained the
   Bible as it was there translated, which was as they said, a most
   corrupted translation. And although this was judged to be but a very
   poor and empty shift; yet even hereupon did his Majesty begin to
   bethink himself of the good that might ensue by a new translation, and
   presently after gave order for this Translation which is now presented
   unto thee. Thus much to satisfy our scrupulous Brethren.

    AN ANSWER TO THE IMPUTATIONS OF OUR ADVERSARIES

   Now to the latter we answer; that we do not deny, nay we affirm and
   avow, that the very meanest translation of the Bible in English, set
   forth by men of our profession, (for we have seen none of theirs of the
   whole Bible as yet) containeth the word of God, nay, is the word of
   God. As the King's speech, which he uttereth in Parliament, being
   translated into French, Dutch, Italian, and Latin, is still the King's
   speech, though it be not interpreted by every Translator with the like
   grace, nor peradventure so fitly for phrase, nor so expressly for
   sense, everywhere. For it is confessed, that things are to take their
   denomination of the greater part; and a natural man could say, Verum
   ubi multa nitent in carmine, non ego paucis offendor maculis, etc.
   [Horace.] A man may be counted a virtuous man, though he have made many
   slips in his life, (else, there were none virtuous, for in many things
   we offend all) [James 3:2] also a comely man and lovely, though he have
   some warts upon his hand, yea, not only freckles upon his face, but
   also scars. No cause therefore why the word translated should be denied
   to be the word, or forbidden to be current, notwithstanding that some
   imperfections and blemishes may be noted in the setting forth of it.
   For whatever was perfect under the Sun, where Apostles or Apostolic
   men, that is, men endued with an extraordinary measure of God's spirit,
   and privileged with the privilege of infallibility, had not their hand?
   The Romanists therefore in refusing to hear, and daring to burn the
   Word translated, did no less than despite the spirit of grace, from
   whom originally it proceeded, and whose sense and meaning, as well as
   man's weakness would enable, it did express. Judge by an example or
   two. Plutarch writeth, that after that Rome had been burnt by the
   Gauls, they fell soon to build it again: but doing it in haste, they
   did not cast the streets, nor proportion the houses in such comely
   fashion, as had been most slightly and convenient; [Plutarch in
   Camillo.] was Catiline therefore an honest man, or a good patriot, that
   sought to bring it to a combustion? or Nero a good Prince, that did
   indeed set it on fire? So, by the story of Ezra, and the prophecy of
   Haggai it may be gathered, that the Temple built by Zerubbabel after
   the return from Babylon, was by no means to be compared to the former
   built by Solomon (for they that remembered the former, wept when they
   considered the latter) [Ezra 3:12] notwithstanding, might this latter
   either have been abhorred and forsaken by the Jews, or profaned by the
   Greeks? The like we are to think of Translations. The translation of
   the Seventy dissenteth from the Original in many places, neither doth
   it come near it, for perspicuity, gravity, majesty; yet which of the
   Apostles did condemn it? Condemn it? Nay, they used it, (as it is
   apparent, and as Saint Jerome and most learned men do confess) which
   they would not have done, nor by their example of using it, so grace
   and commend it to the Church, if it had been unworthy of the
   appellation and name of the word of God. And whereas they urge for
   their second defence of their vilifying and abusing of the English
   Bibles, or some pieces thereof, which they meet with, for that heretics
   (forsooth) were the Authors of the translations, (heretics they call us
   by the same right that they call themselves Catholics, both being
   wrong) we marvel what divinity taught them so. We are sure Tertullian
   was of another mind: Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas?
   [Tertul. de praescript. contra haereses.] Do we try men's faith by
   their persons? we should try their persons by their faith. Also S.
   Augustine was of another mind: for he lighting upon certain rules made
   by Tychonius a Donatist, for the better understanding of the word, was
   not ashamed to make use of them, yea, to insert them into his own book,
   with giving commendation to them so far forth as they were worthy to be
   commended, as is to be seen in S. Augustine's third book De doctrina
   Christiana. [S. August. 3. de doct. Christ. cap. 30.] To be short,
   Origen, and the whole Church of God for certain hundred years, were of
   another mind: for they were so far from treading under foot, (much more
   from burning) the Translation of Aquila a Proselyte, that is, one that
   had turned Jew; of Symmachus, and Theodotion, both Ebionites, that is,
   most vile heretics, that they joined together with the Hebrew Original,
   and the Translation of the Seventy (as hath been before signified out
   of Epiphanius) and set them forth openly to be considered of and
   perused by all. But we weary the unlearned, who need not know so much,
   and trouble the learned, who know it already.

   Yet before we end, we must answer a third cavil and objection of theirs
   against us, for altering and amending our Translations so oft; wherein
   truly they deal hardly, and strangely with us. For to whomever was it
   imputed for a fault (by such as were wise) to go over that which he had
   done, and to amend it where he saw cause? Saint Augustine was not
   afraid to exhort S. Jerome to a Palinodia or recantation; [S. Aug.
   Epist. 9.] and doth even glory that he seeth his infirmities. [S. Aug.
   Epist. 8.] If we be sons of the Truth, we must consider what it
   speaketh, and trample upon our own credit, yea, and upon other men's
   too, if either be any way an hindrance to it. This to the cause: then
   to the persons we say, that of all men they ought to be most silent in
   this case. For what varieties have they, and what alterations have they
   made, not only of their Service books, Portesses and Breviaries, but
   also of their Latin Translation? The Service book supposed to be made
   by S. Ambrose (Officium Ambrosianum) was a great while in special use
   and request; but Pope Hadrian calling a Council with the aid of Charles
   the Emperor, abolished it, yea, burnt it, and commanded the Service
   book of Saint Gregory universally to be used. [Durand. lib. 5. cap. 2.]
   Well, Officium Gregorianum gets by this means to be in credit, but doth
   it continue without change or altering? No, the very Roman Service was
   of two fashions, the New fashion, and the Old, (the one used in one
   Church, the other in another) as is to be seen in Pamelius a Romanist,
   his Preface, before Micrologus. the same Pamelius reporteth out
   Radulphus de Rivo, that about the year of our Lord, 1277, Pope Nicolas
   the Third removed out of the Churches of Rome, the more ancient books
   (of Service) and brought into use the Missals of the Friers Minorites,
   and commanded them to be observed there; insomuch that about an hundred
   years after, when the above name Radulphus happened to be at Rome, he
   found all the books to be new, (of the new stamp). Neither were there
   this chopping and changing in the more ancient times only, but also of
   late: Pius Quintus himself confesseth, that every Bishopric almost had
   a peculiar kind of service, most unlike to that which others had: which
   moved him to abolish all other Breviaries, though never so ancient, and
   privileged and published by Bishops in their Dioceses, and to establish
   and ratify that only which was of his own setting forth, in the year
   1568. Now when the father of their Church, who gladly would heal the
   sore of the daughter of his people softly and slightly, and make the
   best of it, findeth so great fault with them for their odds and
   jarring; we hope the children have no great cause to vaunt of their
   uniformity. But the difference that appeareth between our Translations,
   and our often correcting of them, is the thing that we are specially
   charged with; let us see therefore whether they themselves be without
   fault this way, (if it be to be counted a fault, to correct) and
   whether they be fit men to throw stones at us: O tandem maior parcas
   insane minori: they that are less sound themselves, out not to object
   infirmities to others. [Horat.] If we should tell them that Valla,
   Stapulensis, Erasmus, and Vives found fault with their vulgar
   Translation, and consequently wished the same to be mended, or a new
   one to be made, they would answer peradventure, that we produced their
   enemies for witnesses against them; albeit, they were in no other sort
   enemies, than as S. Paul was to the Galatians, for telling them the
   truth [Gal 4:16]: and it were to be wished, that they had dared to tell
   it them plainlier and oftener. But what will they say to this, that
   Pope Leo the Tenth allowed Erasmus' Translation of the New Testament,
   so much different from the vulgar, by his Apostolic Letter and Bull;
   that the same Leo exhorted Pagnine to translate the whole Bible, and
   bare whatsoever charges was necessary for the work? [Sixtus Senens.]
   Surely, as the Apostle reasoneth to the Hebrews, that if the former Law
   and Testament had been sufficient, there had been no need of the
   latter: [Heb 7:11 and 8:7] so we may say, that if the old vulgar had
   been at all points allowable, to small purpose had labour and charges
   been undergone, about framing of a new. If they say, it was one Pope's
   private opinion, and that he consulted only himself; then we are able
   to go further with them, and to aver, that more of their chief men of
   all sorts, even their own Trent champions Paiva and Vega, and their own
   Inquisitors, Hieronymus ab Oleastro, and their own Bishop Isidorus
   Clarius, and their own Cardinal Thomas a Vio Caietan, do either make
   new Translations themselves, or follow new ones of other men's making,
   or note the vulgar Interpreter for halting; none of them fear to
   dissent from him, nor yet to except against him. And call they this an
   uniform tenor of text and judgment about the text, so many of their
   Worthies disclaiming the now received conceit? Nay, we will yet come
   nearer the quick: doth not their Paris edition differ from the Lovaine,
   and Hentenius his from them both, and yet all of them allowed by
   authority? Nay, doth not Sixtus Quintus confess, that certain Catholics
   (he meaneth certain of his own side) were in such an humor of
   translating the Scriptures into Latin, that Satan taking occasion by
   them, though they thought of no such matter, did strive what he could,
   out of so uncertain and manifold a variety of Translations, so to
   mingle all things, that nothing might seem to be left certain and firm
   in them, etc.? [Sixtus 5. praefat. fixa Bibliis.] Nay, further, did not
   the same Sixtus ordain by an inviolable decree, and that with the
   counsel and consent of his Cardinals, that the Latin edition of the old
   and new Testament, which the Council of Trent would have to be
   authentic, is the same without controversy which he then set forth,
   being diligently corrected and printed in the Printinghouse of Vatican?
   Thus Sixtus in his Preface before his Bible. And yet Clement the Eighth
   his immediate successor, published another edition of the Bible,
   containing in it infinite differences from that of Sixtus, (and many of
   them weighty and material) and yet this must be authentic by all means.
   What is to have the faith of our glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST with Yea or
   Nay, if this be not? Again, what is sweet harmony and consent, if this
   be? Therefore, as Demaratus of Corinth advised a great King, before he
   talked of the dissensions of the Grecians, to compose his domestic
   broils (for at that time his Queen and his son and heir were at deadly
   feud with him) so all the while that our adversaries do make so many
   and so various editions themselves, and do jar so much about the worth
   and authority of them, they can with no show of equity challenge us for
   changing and correcting.

    THE PURPOSE OF THE TRANSLATORS, WITH THEIR NUMBER, FURNITURE, CARE, ETC.

   But it is high time to leave them, and to show in brief what we
   proposed to ourselves, and what course we held in this our perusal and
   survey of the Bible. Truly (good Christian Reader) we never thought
   from the beginning, that we should need to make a new Translation, nor
   yet to make of a bad one a good one, (for then the imputation of Sixtus
   had been true in some sort, that our people had been fed with gall of
   Dragons instead of wine, with whey instead of milk:) but to make a good
   one better, or out of many good ones, one principal good one, not
   justly to be excepted against; that hath been our endeavor, that our
   mark. To that purpose there were many chosen, that were greater in
   other men's eyes than in their own, and that sought the truth rather
   than their own praise. Again, they came or were thought to come to the
   work, not exercendi causa (as one saith) but exercitati, that is,
   learned, not to learn: For the chief overseer and [NOTE: Greek letters
   omitted] under his Majesty, to whom not only we, but also our whole
   Church was much bound, knew by his wisdom, which thing also Nazianzen
   taught so long ago, that it is a preposterous order to teach first and
   to learn after, yea that [NOTE: Greek letters omitted] to learn and
   practice together, is neither commendable for the workman, nor safe for
   the work. [Idem in Apologet.] Therefore such were thought upon, as
   could say modestly with Saint Jerome, Et Hebreaeum Sermonem ex parte
   didicimus, et in Latino pene ab ipsis incunabulis etc. detriti sumus.
   "Both we have learned the Hebrew tongue in part, and in the Latin we
   have been exercised almost from our very cradle." S. Jerome maketh no
   mention of the Greek tongue, wherein yet he did excel, because he
   translated not the old Testament out of Greek, but out of Hebrew. And
   in what sort did these assemble? In the trust of their own knowledge,
   or of their sharpness of wit, or deepness of judgment, as it were in an
   arm of flesh? At no hand. They trusted in him that hath the key of
   David, opening and no man shutting; they prayed to the Lord the Father
   of our Lord, to the effect that S. Augustine did; "O let thy Scriptures
   be my pure delight, let me not be deceived in them, neither let me
   deceive by them." [S. Aug. lib. II. Confess. cap. 2.] In this
   confidence, and with this devotion did they assemble together; not too
   many, lest one should trouble another; and yet many, lest many things
   haply might escape them. If you ask what they had before them, truly it
   was the Hebrew text of the Old Testament, the Greek of the New. These
   are the two golden pipes, or rather conduits, where-through the olive
   branches empty themselves into the gold. Saint Augustine calleth them
   precedent, or original tongues; [S. August. 3. de doctr. c. 3. etc.]
   Saint Jerome, fountains. [S. Jerome. ad Suniam et Fretel.] The same
   Saint Jerome affirmeth, [S. Jerome. ad Lucinium, Dist. 9 ut veterum.]
   and Gratian hath not spared to put it into his Decree, That "as the
   credit of the old Books" (he meaneth of the Old Testament) "is to be
   tried by the Hebrew Volumes, so of the New by the Greek tongue," he
   meaneth by the original Greek. If truth be tried by these tongues, then
   whence should a Translation be made, but out of them? These tongues
   therefore, the Scriptures we say in those tongues, we set before us to
   translate, being the tongues wherein God was pleased to speak to his
   Church by the Prophets and Apostles. Neither did we run over the work
   with that posting haste that the Septuagint did, if that be true which
   is reported of them, that they finished it in 72 days; [Joseph. Antiq.
   lib. 12.] neither were we barred or hindered from going over it again,
   having once done it, like S. Jerome, if that be true which himself
   reporteth, that he could no sooner write anything, but presently it was
   caught from him, and published, and he could not have leave to mend it:
   [S. Jerome. ad Pammac. pro libr. advers. Iovinian.] neither, to be
   short, were we the first that fell in hand with translating the
   Scripture into English, and consequently destitute of former helps, as
   it is written of Origen, that he was the first in a manner, that put
   his hand to write Commentaries upon the Scriptures, [Sophoc. in Elect.]
   and therefore no marvel, if he overshot himself many times. None of
   these things: the work hath not been huddled up in 72 days, but hath
   cost the workmen, as light as it seemeth, the pains of twice seven
   times seventy two days and more: matters of such weight and consequence
   are to be speeded with maturity: for in a business of movement a man
   feareth not the blame of convenient slackness. [S. Chrysost. in II.
   Thess. cap. 2.] Neither did we think much to consult the Translators or
   Commentators, Chaldee, Hebrew, Syrian, Greek or Latin, no nor the
   Spanish, French, Italian, or Dutch; neither did we disdain to revise
   that which we had done, and to bring back to the anvil that which we
   had hammered: but having and using as great helps as were needful, and
   fearing no reproach for slowness, nor coveting praise for expedition,
   we have at length, through the good hand of the Lord upon us, brought
   the work to that pass that you see.

    REASONS MOVING US TO SET DIVERSITY OF SENSES IN THE MARGIN, WHERE THERE IS
    GREAT PROBABILITY FOR EACH

   Some peradventure would have no variety of senses to be set in the
   margin, lest the authority of the Scriptures for deciding of
   controversies by that show of uncertainty, should somewhat be shaken.
   But we hold their judgment not to be sound in this point. For though,
   "whatsoever things are necessary are manifest," as S. Chrysostom saith,
   [S. Chrysost. in II. Thess. cap. 2.] and as S. Augustine, "In those
   things that are plainly set down in the Scriptures, all such matters
   are found that concern Faith, Hope, and Charity. [S. Aug. 2. de doctr.
   Christ. cap. 9.] Yet for all that it cannot be dissembled, that partly
   to exercise and whet our wits, partly to wean the curious from the
   loathing of them for their everywhere plainness, partly also to stir up
   our devotion to crave the assistance of God's spirit by prayer, and
   lastly, that we might be forward to seek aid of our brethren by
   conference, and never scorn those that be not in all respects so
   complete as they should be, being to seek in many things ourselves, it
   hath pleased God in his divine providence, here and there to scatter
   words and sentences of that difficulty and doubtfulness, not in
   doctrinal points that concern salvation, (for in such it hath been
   vouched that the Scriptures are plain) but in matters of less moment,
   that fearfulness would better beseem us than confidence, and if we will
   resolve upon modesty with S. Augustine, (though not in this same case
   altogether, yet upon the same ground) Melius est debitare de occultis,
   quam litigare de incertis, [S. Aug li. S. de Genes. ad liter. cap. 5.]
   "it is better to make doubt of those things which are secret, than to
   strive about those things that are uncertain." There be many words in
   the Scriptures, which be never found there but once, (having neither
   brother or neighbor, as the Hebrews speak) so that we cannot be holpen
   by conference of places. Again, there be many rare names of certain
   birds, beasts and precious stones, etc. concerning the Hebrews
   themselves are so divided among themselves for judgment, that they may
   seem to have defined this or that, rather because they would say
   something, than because they were sure of that which they said, as S.
   Jerome somewhere saith of the Septuagint. Now in such a case, doth not
   a margin do well to admonish the Reader to seek further, and not to
   conclude or dogmatize upon this or that peremptorily? For as it is a
   fault of incredulity, to doubt of those things that are evident: so to
   determine of such things as the Spirit of God hath left (even in the
   judgment of the judicious) questionable, can be no less than
   presumption. Therefore as S. Augustine saith, that variety of
   Translations is profitable for the finding out of the sense of the
   Scriptures: [S. Aug. 2. De doctr. Christian. cap. 14.] so diversity of
   signification and sense in the margin, where the text is no so clear,
   must needs do good, yea, is necessary, as we are persuaded. We know
   that Sixtus Quintus expressly forbiddeth, that any variety of readings
   of their vulgar edition, should be put in the margin, [Sixtus 5. praef.
   Bibliae.] (which though it be not altogether the same thing to that we
   have in hand, yet it looketh that way) but we think he hath not all of
   his own side his favorers, for this conceit. They that are wise, had
   rather have their judgments at liberty in differences of readings, than
   to be captivated to one, when it may be the other. If they were sure
   that their high Priest had all laws shut up in his breast, as Paul the
   Second bragged, [Plat. in Paulo secundo.] and that he were as free from
   error by special privilege, as the Dictators of Rome were made by law
   inviolable, it were another matter; then his word were an Oracle, his
   opinion a decision. But the eyes of the world are now open, God be
   thanked, and have been a great while, they find that he is subject to
   the same affections and infirmities that others be, that his skin is
   penetrable, and therefore so much as he proveth, not as much as he
   claimeth, they grant and embrace.

    REASONS INDUCING US NOT TO STAND CURIOUSLY UPON AN IDENTITY OF PHRASING

   Another things we think good to admonish thee of (gentle Reader) that
   we have not tied ourselves to an uniformity of phrasing, or to an
   identity of words, as some peradventure would wish that we had done,
   because they observe, that some learned men somewhere, have been as
   exact as they could that way. Truly, that we might not vary from the
   sense of that which we had translated before, if the word signified
   that same in both places (for there be some words that be not the same
   sense everywhere) we were especially careful, and made a conscience,
   according to our duty. But, that we should express the same notion in
   the same particular word; as for example, if we translate the Hebrew or
   Greek word once by PURPOSE, never to call it INTENT; if one where
   JOURNEYING, never TRAVELING; if one where THINK, never SUPPOSE; if one
   where PAIN, never ACHE; if one where JOY, never GLADNESS, etc. Thus to
   mince the matter, we thought to savour more of curiosity than wisdom,
   and that rather it would breed scorn in the Atheist, than bring profit
   to the godly Reader. For is the kingdom of God to become words or
   syllables? why should we be in bondage to them if we may be free, use
   one precisely when we may use another no less fit, as commodiously? A
   godly Father in the Primitive time showed himself greatly moved, that
   one of newfangledness called [NOTE: Greek omitted but was a dispute
   over the word for "a bed"] [Niceph. Calist. lib.8. cap.42.] though the
   difference be little or none; and another reporteth that he was much
   abused for turning "Cucurbita" (to which reading the people had been
   used) into "Hedera". [S. Jerome in 4. Ionae. See S. Aug: epist. 10.]
   Now if this happens in better times, and upon so small occasions, we
   might justly fear hard censure, if generally we should make verbal and
   unnecessary changings. We might also be charged (by scoffers) with some
   unequal dealing towards a great number of good English words. For as it
   is written of a certain great Philosopher, that he should say , that
   those logs were happy that were made images to be worshipped; for their
   fellows, as good as they, lay for blocks behind the fire: so if we
   should say, as it were, unto certain words, Stand up higher, have a
   place in the Bible always, and to others of like quality, Get ye hence,
   be banished forever, we might be taxed peradventure with S. James his
   words, namely, "To be partial in ourselves and judges of evil
   thoughts." Add hereunto, that niceness in words was always counted the
   next step to trifling, and so was to be curious about names too: also
   that we cannot follow a better pattern for elocution than God himself;
   therefore he using divers words, in his holy writ, and indifferently
   for one thing in nature: [see Euseb. li. 12. ex Platon.] we, if we will
   not be superstitious, may use the same liberty in our English versions
   out of Hebrew and Greek, for that copy or store that he hath given us.
   Lastly, we have on the one side avoided the scrupulosity of the
   Puritans, who leave the old Ecclesiastical words, and betake them to
   other, as when they put WASHING for BAPTISM, and CONGREGATION instead
   of CHURCH: as also on the other side we have shunned the obscurity of
   the Papists, in their AZIMES, TUNIKE, RATIONAL, HOLOCAUSTS, PRAEPUCE,
   PASCHE, and a number of such like, whereof their late Translation is
   full, and that of purpose to darken the sense, that since they must
   needs translate the Bible, yet by the language thereof, it may be kept
   from being understood. But we desire that the Scripture may speak like
   itself, as in the language of Canaan, that it may be understood even of
   the very vulgar.

   Many other things we might give thee warning of (gentle Reader) if we
   had not exceeded the measure of a Preface already. It remaineth, that
   we commend thee to God, and to the Spirit of his grace, which is able
   to build further than we can ask or think. He removeth the scales from
   our eyes, the vail from our hearts, opening our wits that we may
   understand his word, enlarging our hearts, yea correcting our
   affections, that we may love it to the end. Ye are brought unto
   fountains of living water which ye digged not; do not cast earth into
   them with the Philistines, neither prefer broken pits before them with
   the wicked Jews. [Gen 26:15. Jer 2:13.] Others have laboured, and you
   may enter into their labours; O receive not so great things in vain, O
   despise not so great salvation! Be not like swine to tread under foot
   so precious things, neither yet like dogs to tear and abuse holy
   things. Say not to our Saviour with the Gergesites, Depart out of our
   coast [Matt 8:34]; neither yet with Esau sell your birthright for a
   mess of pottage [Heb 12:16]. If light be come into the world, love not
   darkness more than light; if food, if clothing be offered, go not
   naked, starve not yourselves. Remember the advice of Nazianzene, "It is
   a grievous thing" (or dangerous) "to neglect a great fair, and to seek
   to make markets afterwards: also the encouragement of S. Chrysostom,
   "It is altogether impossible, that he that is sober" (and watchful)
   "should at any time be neglected:" [S. Chrysost. in epist. ad Rom. cap.
   14. oral. 26.] Lastly, the admonition and menacing of S. Augustine,
   "They that despise God's will inviting them, shall feel God's will
   taking vengeance of them." [S. August. ad artic. sibi falso object.
   Artic. 16.] It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
   God; [Heb 10:31] but a blessed thing it is, and will bring us to
   everlasting blessedness in the end, when God speaketh unto us, to
   hearken; when he setteth his word before us, to read it; when he
   stretcheth out his hand and calleth, to answer, Here am I, here we are
   to do thy will, O God. The Lord work a care and conscience in us to
   know him and serve him, that we may be acknowledged of him at the
   appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the holy Ghost, be all
   praise and thanksgiving.

   Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 Old Testament
     __________________________________________________________________

  The First Book of Moses, called

Genesis
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

   ^2And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the
   face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
   waters.

   ^3And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

   ^4And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light
   from the darkness.

   ^5And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And
   the evening and the morning were the first day.

   ^6And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
   and let it divide the waters from the waters.

   ^7And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under
   the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it
   was so.

   ^8And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning
   were the second day.

   ^9And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
   unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

   ^10And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the
   waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.

   ^11And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
   seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is
   in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

   ^12And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his
   kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his
   kind: and God saw that it was good.

   ^13And the evening and the morning were the third day.

   ^14And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to
   divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
   seasons, and for days, and years:

   ^15And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give
   light upon the earth: and it was so.

   ^16And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
   and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

   ^17And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon
   the earth,

   ^18And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light
   from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

   ^19And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

   ^20And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
   creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
   open firmament of heaven.

   ^21And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth,
   which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every
   winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

   ^22And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
   the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

   ^23And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

   ^24And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after
   his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his
   kind: and it was so.

   ^25And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after
   their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his
   kind: and God saw that it was good.

   ^26And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and
   let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
   the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every
   creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

   ^27So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
   him; male and female created he them.

   ^28And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and
   multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion
   over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
   living thing that moveth upon the earth.

   ^29And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed,
   which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which
   is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

   ^30And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and
   to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I
   have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

   ^31And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very
   good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.

   ^2And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he
   rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

   ^3And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in
   it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

   ^4These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they
   were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the
   heavens,

   ^5And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every
   herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to
   rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

   ^6But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face
   of the ground.

   ^7And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
   into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

   ^8And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put
   the man whom he had formed.

   ^9And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is
   pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
   midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

   ^10And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it
   was parted, and became into four heads.

   ^11The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the
   whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;

   ^12And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx
   stone.

   ^13And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that
   compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.

   ^14And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth
   toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

   ^15And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden
   to dress it and to keep it.

   ^16And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the
   garden thou mayest freely eat:

   ^17But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
   eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
   die.

   ^18And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone;
   I will make him an help meet for him.

   ^19And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field,
   and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he
   would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that
   was the name thereof.

   ^20And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and
   to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help
   meet for him.

   ^21And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he
   slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
   thereof;

   ^22And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman,
   and brought her unto the man.

   ^23And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh:
   she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.

   ^24Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
   cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

   ^25And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
   ashamed.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the
   Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye
   shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

   ^2And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the
   trees of the garden:

   ^3But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God
   hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye
   die.

   ^4And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:

   ^5For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
   shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

   ^6And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it
   was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise,
   she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her
   husband with her; and he did eat.

   ^7And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were
   naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.

   ^8And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the
   cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence
   of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.

   ^9And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

   ^10And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid,
   because I was naked; and I hid myself.

   ^11And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of
   the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?

   ^12And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave
   me of the tree, and I did eat.

   ^13And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast
   done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

   ^14And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this,
   thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field;
   upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of
   thy life:

   ^15And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
   seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his
   heel.

   ^16Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
   conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire
   shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

   ^17And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of
   thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee,
   saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in
   sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;

   ^18Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou
   shalt eat the herb of the field;

   ^19In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto
   the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto
   dust shalt thou return.

   ^20And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of
   all living.

   ^21Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins,
   and clothed them.

   ^22And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
   know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
   of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:

   ^23Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to
   till the ground from whence he was taken.

   ^24So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of
   Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the
   way of the tree of life.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said,
   I have gotten a man from the Lord.

   ^2And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep,
   but Cain was a tiller of the ground.

   ^3And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the
   fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord.

   ^4And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the
   fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering:

   ^5But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was
   very wroth, and his countenance fell.

   ^6And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy
   countenance fallen?

   ^7If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not
   well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and
   thou shalt rule over him.

   ^8And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they
   were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew
   him.

   ^9And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said,
   I know not: Am I my brother's keeper?

   ^10And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood
   crieth unto me from the ground.

   ^11And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth
   to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;

   ^12When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto
   thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the
   earth.

   ^13And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can
   bear.

   ^14Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth;
   and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a
   vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that
   findeth me shall slay me.

   ^15And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain,
   vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark upon
   Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

   ^16And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the
   land of Nod, on the east of Eden.

   ^17And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he
   builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his
   son, Enoch.

   ^18And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael
   begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.

   ^19And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah,
   and the name of the other Zillah.

   ^20And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents,
   and of such as have cattle.

   ^21And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as
   handle the harp and organ.

   ^22And Zillah, she also bare Tubal- cain, an instructer of every
   artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.

   ^23And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye
   wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my
   wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

   ^24If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and
   sevenfold.

   ^25And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his
   name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of
   Abel, whom Cain slew.

   ^26And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his
   name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God
   created man, in the likeness of God made he him;

   ^2Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their
   name Adam, in the day when they were created.

   ^3And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his
   own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:

   ^4And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred
   years: and he begat sons and daughters:

   ^5And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years:
   and he died.

   ^6And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:

   ^7And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and
   begat sons and daughters:

   ^8And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he
   died.

   ^9And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:

   ^10And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen
   years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^11And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he
   died.

   ^12And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel:

   ^13And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty
   years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^14And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he
   died.

   ^15And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:

   ^16And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty
   years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^17And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five
   years: and he died.

   ^18And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:

   ^19And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat
   sons and daughters:

   ^20And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and
   he died.

   ^21And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:

   ^22And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred
   years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^23And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:

   ^24And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.

   ^25And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat
   Lamech:

   ^26And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and
   two years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^27And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine
   years: and he died.

   ^28And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:

   ^29And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us
   concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which
   the Lord hath cursed.

   ^30And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five
   years, and begat sons and daughters:

   ^31And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven
   years: and he died.

   ^32And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and
   Japheth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
   earth, and daughters were born unto them,

   ^2That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair;
   and they took them wives of all which they chose.

   ^3And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for
   that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
   years.

   ^4There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
   when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
   children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
   renown.

   ^5And GOD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
   that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
   continually.

   ^6And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
   grieved him at his heart.

   ^7And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the
   face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the
   fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.

   ^8But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.

   ^9These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in
   his generations, and Noah walked with God.

   ^10And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

   ^11The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with
   violence.

   ^12And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all
   flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

   ^13And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for
   the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will
   destroy them with the earth.

   ^14Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark,
   and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

   ^15And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of
   the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,
   and the height of it thirty cubits.

   ^16A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
   finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side
   thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.

   ^17And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth,
   to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven;
   and every thing that is in the earth shall die.

   ^18But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into
   the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with
   thee.

   ^19And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou
   bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male
   and female.

   ^20Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every
   creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall
   come unto thee, to keep them alive.

   ^21And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
   gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

   ^22Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark;
   for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.

   ^2Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and
   his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his
   female.

   ^3Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep
   seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

   ^4For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty
   days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will
   I destroy from off the face of the earth.

   ^5And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.

   ^6And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon
   the earth.

   ^7And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
   with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

   ^8Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and
   of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,

   ^9There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the
   female, as God had commanded Noah.

   ^10And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood
   were upon the earth.

   ^11In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the
   seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of
   the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

   ^12And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

   ^13In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth,
   the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with
   them, into the ark;

   ^14They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their
   kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his
   kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.

   ^15And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh,
   wherein is the breath of life.

   ^16And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God
   had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in.

   ^17And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
   increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

   ^18And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth;
   and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

   ^19And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the
   high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

   ^20Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were
   covered.

   ^21And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of
   cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon
   the earth, and every man:

   ^22All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the
   dry land, died.

   ^23And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of
   the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl
   of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only
   remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

   ^24And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle
   that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the
   earth, and the waters asswaged;

   ^2The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were
   stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;

   ^3And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the
   end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.

   ^4And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
   the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.

   ^5And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the
   tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the
   mountains seen.

   ^6And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the
   window of the ark which he had made:

   ^7And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the
   waters were dried up from off the earth.

   ^8Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated
   from off the face of the ground;

   ^9But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned
   unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole
   earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto
   him into the ark.

   ^10And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove
   out of the ark;

   ^11And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth
   was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated
   from off the earth.

   ^12And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which
   returned not again unto him any more.

   ^13And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
   first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from
   off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked,
   and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

   ^14And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
   month, was the earth dried.

   ^15And God spake unto Noah, saying,

   ^16Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons'
   wives with thee.

   ^17Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all
   flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that
   creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth,
   and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

   ^18And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
   with him:

   ^19Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever
   creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.

   ^20And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and took of every clean
   beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
   altar.

   ^21And the Lord smelled a sweet savour; and the Lord said in his heart,
   I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the
   imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again
   smite any more every thing living, as I have done.

   ^22While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat,
   and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and
   multiply, and replenish the earth.

   ^2And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of
   the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon
   the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they
   delivered.

   ^3Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
   green herb have I given you all things.

   ^4But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye
   not eat.

   ^5And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of
   every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
   every man's brother will I require the life of man.

   ^6Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
   the image of God made he man.

   ^7And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the
   earth, and multiply therein.

   ^8And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,

   ^9And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
   after you;

   ^10And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the
   cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out
   of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

   ^11And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh
   be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any
   more be a flood to destroy the earth.

   ^12And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between
   me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual
   generations:

   ^13I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a
   covenant between me and the earth.

   ^14And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that
   the bow shall be seen in the cloud:

   ^15And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and
   every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become
   a flood to destroy all flesh.

   ^16And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I
   may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living
   creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

   ^17And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I
   have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

   ^18And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and
   Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.

   ^19These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth
   overspread.

   ^20And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:

   ^21And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered
   within his tent.

   ^22And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and
   told his two brethren without.

   ^23And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
   shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
   father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
   nakedness.

   ^24And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done
   unto him.

   ^25And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
   unto his brethren.

   ^26And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be
   his servant.

   ^27God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem;
   and Canaan shall be his servant.

   ^28And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

   ^29And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he
   died.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and
   Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

   ^2The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
   Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

   ^3And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

   ^4And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

   ^5By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every
   one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

   ^6And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.

   ^7And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and
   Sabtecha: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

   ^8And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

   ^9He was a mighty hunter before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as
   Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord.

   ^10And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad,
   and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

   ^11Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the
   city Rehoboth, and Calah,

   ^12And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.

   ^13And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,

   ^14And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and
   Caphtorim.

   ^15And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,

   ^16And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,

   ^17And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,

   ^18And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward
   were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.

   ^19And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to
   Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah,
   and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.

   ^20These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their
   tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

   ^21Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother
   of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

   ^22The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and
   Aram.

   ^23And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.

   ^24And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.

   ^25And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in
   his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.

   ^26And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

   ^27And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,

   ^28And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

   ^29And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of
   Joktan.

   ^30And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount
   of the east.

   ^31These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their
   tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

   ^32These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations,
   in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth
   after the flood.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

   ^2And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found
   a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.

   ^3And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them
   throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.

   ^4And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top
   may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered
   abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

   ^5And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
   children of men builded.

   ^6And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one
   language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained
   from them, which they have imagined to do.

   ^7Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they
   may not understand one another's speech.

   ^8So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all
   the earth: and they left off to build the city.

   ^9Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there
   confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord
   scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

   ^10These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old,
   and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:

   ^11And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat
   sons and daughters.

   ^12And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:

   ^13And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three
   years, and begat sons and daughters.

   ^14And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:

   ^15And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years,
   and begat sons and daughters.

   ^16And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:

   ^17And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years,
   and begat sons and daughters.

   ^18And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:

   ^19And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and
   begat sons and daughters.

   ^20And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:

   ^21And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and
   begat sons and daughters.

   ^22And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:

   ^23And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat
   sons and daughters.

   ^24And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:

   ^25And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years,
   and begat sons and daughters.

   ^26And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

   ^27Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor,
   and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.

   ^28And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity,
   in Ur of the Chaldees.

   ^29And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife was
   Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the
   father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.

   ^30But Sarai was barren; she had no child.

   ^31And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's
   son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they went
   forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan;
   and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.

   ^32And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah
   died in Haran.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from
   thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew
   thee:

   ^2And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and
   make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

   ^3And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth
   thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.

   ^4So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with
   him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of
   Haran.

   ^5And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all
   their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had
   gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and
   into the land of Canaan they came.

   ^6And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the
   plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.

   ^7And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give
   this land: and there builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared
   unto him.

   ^8And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and
   pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and
   there he builded an altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of
   the Lord.

   ^9And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.

   ^10And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt
   to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.

   ^11And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that
   he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair
   woman to look upon:

   ^12Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee,
   that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they
   will save thee alive.

   ^13Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me
   for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

   ^14And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the
   Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.

   ^15The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before
   Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.

   ^16And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and
   oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses,
   and camels.

   ^17And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues
   because of Sarai Abram's wife.

   ^18And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast done
   unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

   ^19Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me
   to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

   ^20And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him
   away, and his wife, and all that he had.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had,
   and Lot with him, into the south.

   ^2And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

   ^3And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the
   place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai;

   ^4Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first:
   and there Abram called on the name of the Lord.

   ^5And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and
   tents.

   ^6And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell
   together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell
   together.

   ^7And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the
   herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled
   then in the land.

   ^8And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between
   me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be
   brethren.

   ^9Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee,
   from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right;
   or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.

   ^10And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that
   it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and
   Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as
   thou comest unto Zoar.

   ^11Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east:
   and they separated themselves the one from the other.

   ^12Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities
   of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.

   ^13But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord
   exceedingly.

   ^14And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him,
   Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art
   northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:

   ^15For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to
   thy seed for ever.

   ^16And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man
   can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.

   ^17Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth
   of it; for I will give it unto thee.

   ^18Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of
   Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king
   of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;

   ^2That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of
   Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the
   king of Bela, which is Zoar.

   ^3All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the
   salt sea.

   ^4Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year
   they rebelled.

   ^5And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were
   with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims
   in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim,

   ^6And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the
   wilderness.

   ^7And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote
   all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in
   Hazezontamar.

   ^8And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and
   the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the
   same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;

   ^9With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations,
   and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings
   with five.

   ^10And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom
   and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the
   mountain.

   ^11And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their
   victuals, and went their way.

   ^12And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and
   his goods, and departed.

   ^13And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for
   he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and
   brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.

   ^14And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed
   his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and
   eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.

   ^15And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night,
   and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand
   of Damascus.

   ^16And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
   brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

   ^17And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the
   slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the
   valley of Shaveh, which is the king's dale.

   ^18And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he
   was the priest of the most high God.

   ^19And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God,
   possessor of heaven and earth:

   ^20And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies
   into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.

   ^21And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take
   the goods to thyself.

   ^22And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto
   the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,

   ^23That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I
   will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have
   made Abram rich:

   ^24Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of
   the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take
   their portion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision,
   saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
   reward.

   ^2And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go
   childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?

   ^3And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one
   born in my house is mine heir.

   ^4And, behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall
   not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels
   shall be thine heir.

   ^5And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven,
   and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto
   him, So shall thy seed be.

   ^6And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to him for
   righteousness.

   ^7And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of
   the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

   ^8And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?

   ^9And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she
   goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
   turtledove, and a young pigeon.

   ^10And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and
   laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

   ^11And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them
   away.

   ^12And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and,
   lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

   ^13And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a
   stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they
   shall afflict them four hundred years;

   ^14And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and
   afterward shall they come out with great substance.

   ^15And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a
   good old age.

   ^16But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the
   iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.

   ^17And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark,
   behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those
   pieces.

   ^18In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto
   thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great
   river, the river Euphrates:

   ^19The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,

   ^20And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,

   ^21And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the
   Jebusites.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid,
   an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.

   ^2And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me
   from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may
   obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.

   ^3And Sarai Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram
   had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband
   Abram to be his wife.

   ^4And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that
   she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

   ^5And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my
   maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was
   despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between me and thee.

   ^6But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her
   as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled
   from her face.

   ^7And the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the
   wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.

   ^8And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither
   wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.

   ^9And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and
   submit thyself under her hands.

   ^10And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed
   exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

   ^11And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with
   child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because
   the Lord hath heard thy affliction.

   ^12And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and
   every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all
   his brethren.

   ^13And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God
   seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth
   me?

   ^14Wherefore the well was called Beerlahairoi; behold, it is between
   Kadesh and Bered.

   ^15And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name, which
   Hagar bare, Ishmael.

   ^16And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael
   to Abram.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to
   Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be
   thou perfect.

   ^2And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply
   thee exceedingly.

   ^3And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,

   ^4As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
   father of many nations.

   ^5Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall
   be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.

   ^6And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of
   thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

   ^7And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
   after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
   God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

   ^8And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
   wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting
   possession; and I will be their God.

   ^9And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
   thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

   ^10This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy
   seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.

   ^11And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be
   a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

   ^12And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every
   man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought
   with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

   ^13He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money,
   must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for
   an everlasting covenant.

   ^14And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not
   circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken
   my covenant.

   ^15And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
   call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.

   ^16And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will
   bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall
   be of her.

   ^17Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart,
   Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall
   Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?

   ^18And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!

   ^19And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou
   shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him
   for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

   ^20And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him,
   and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve
   princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.

   ^21But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear
   unto thee at this set time in the next year.

   ^22And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.

   ^23And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
   house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
   men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
   the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.

   ^24And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised
   in the flesh of his foreskin.

   ^25And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised
   in the flesh of his foreskin.

   ^26In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.

   ^27And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
   money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in
   the tent door in the heat of the day;

   ^2And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him:
   and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed
   himself toward the ground,

   ^3And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not
   away, I pray thee, from thy servant:

   ^4Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and
   rest yourselves under the tree:

   ^5And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after
   that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And
   they said, So do, as thou hast said.

   ^6And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready
   quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the
   hearth.

   ^7And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and
   gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

   ^8And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and
   set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did
   eat.

   ^9And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold,
   in the tent.

   ^10And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time
   of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it
   in the tent door, which was behind him.

   ^11Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
   ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.

   ^12Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old
   shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?

   ^13And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying,
   Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?

   ^14Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will
   return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a
   son.

   ^15Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he
   said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.

   ^16And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and
   Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

   ^17And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

   ^18Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation,
   and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?

   ^19For I know him, that he will command his children and his household
   after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
   judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath
   spoken of him.

   ^20And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
   and because their sin is very grievous;

   ^21I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
   according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will
   know.

   ^22And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom:
   but Abraham stood yet before the Lord.

   ^23And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the
   righteous with the wicked?

   ^24Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou
   also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are
   therein?

   ^25That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous
   with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
   be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

   ^26And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the
   city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.

   ^27And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to
   speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes:

   ^28Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
   destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there
   forty and five, I will not destroy it.

   ^29And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall
   be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty's sake.

   ^30And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will
   speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I
   will not do it, if I find thirty there.

   ^31And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
   Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I
   will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

   ^32And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but
   this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will
   not destroy it for ten's sake.

   ^33And the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with
   Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of
   Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself
   with his face toward the ground;

   ^2And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your
   servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall
   rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will
   abide in the street all night.

   ^3And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and
   entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake
   unleavened bread, and they did eat.

   ^4But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom,
   compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from
   every quarter:

   ^5And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which
   came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know
   them.

   ^6And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,

   ^7And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

   ^8Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I
   pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your
   eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the
   shadow of my roof.

   ^9And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came
   in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse
   with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even
   Lot, and came near to break the door.

   ^10But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to
   them, and shut to the door.

   ^11And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
   blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to
   find the door.

   ^12And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law,
   and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city,
   bring them out of this place:

   ^13For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen
   great before the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy
   it.

   ^14And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his
   daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will
   destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in
   law.

   ^15And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying,
   Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou
   be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

   ^16And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the
   hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord
   being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him
   without the city.

   ^17And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that
   he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou
   in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

   ^18And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:

   ^19Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast
   magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life;
   and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:

   ^20Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one:
   Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall
   live.

   ^21And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this
   thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou
   hast spoken.

   ^22Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be
   come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.

   ^23The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.

   ^24Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire
   from the Lord out of heaven;

   ^25And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the
   inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.

   ^26But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of
   salt.

   ^27And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood
   before the Lord:

   ^28And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of
   the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the
   smoke of a furnace.

   ^29And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain,
   that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
   overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.

   ^30And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two
   daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a
   cave, he and his two daughters.

   ^31And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and
   there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of
   all the earth:

   ^32Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him,
   that we may preserve seed of our father.

   ^33And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn
   went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay
   down, nor when she arose.

   ^34And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the
   younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him
   drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we
   may preserve seed of our father.

   ^35And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the
   younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay
   down, nor when she arose.

   ^36Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.

   ^37And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is
   the father of the Moabites unto this day.

   ^38And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Benammi:
   the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled
   between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.

   ^2And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech
   king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.

   ^3But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
   Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
   for she is a man's wife.

   ^4But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou
   slay also a righteous nation?

   ^5Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself
   said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of
   my hands have I done this.

   ^6And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in
   the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning
   against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

   ^7Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he
   shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not,
   know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.

   ^8Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
   servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
   sore afraid.

   ^9Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done
   unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me
   and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought
   not to be done.

   ^10And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast
   done this thing?

   ^11And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not
   in this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake.

   ^12And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father,
   but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

   ^13And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's
   house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew
   unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my
   brother.

   ^14And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
   womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his
   wife.

   ^15And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it
   pleaseth thee.

   ^16And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand
   pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto
   all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.

   ^17So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife,
   and his maidservants; and they bare children.

   ^18For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
   Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah
   as he had spoken.

   ^2For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the
   set time of which God had spoken to him.

   ^3And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom
   Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

   ^4And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God
   had commanded him.

   ^5And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born
   unto him.

   ^6And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will
   laugh with me.

   ^7And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should
   have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.

   ^8And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast
   the same day that Isaac was weaned.

   ^9And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto
   Abraham, mocking.

   ^10Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her
   son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
   with Isaac.

   ^11And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his
   son.

   ^12And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight
   because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah
   hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy
   seed be called.

   ^13And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because
   he is thy seed.

   ^14And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
   bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder,
   and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the
   wilderness of Beersheba.

   ^15And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under
   one of the shrubs.

   ^16And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as
   it were a bowshot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child.
   And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

   ^17And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to
   Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear
   not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

   ^18Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make
   him a great nation.

   ^19And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went,
   and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

   ^20And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness,
   and became an archer.

   ^21And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a
   wife out of the land of Egypt.

   ^22And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the
   chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee
   in all that thou doest:

   ^23Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal
   falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but according
   to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and
   to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

   ^24And Abraham said, I will swear.

   ^25And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which
   Abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

   ^26And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither
   didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.

   ^27And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and
   both of them made a covenant.

   ^28And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

   ^29And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs
   which thou hast set by themselves?

   ^30And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand,
   that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.

   ^31Wherefore he called that place Beersheba; because there they sware
   both of them.

   ^32Thus they made a covenant at Beersheba: then Abimelech rose up, and
   Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land
   of the Philistines.

   ^33And Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and called there on the
   name of the Lord, the everlasting God.

   ^34And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and
   said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.

   ^2And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou
   lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a
   burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.

   ^3And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and
   took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the
   wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of
   which God had told him.

   ^4Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place
   afar off.

   ^5And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and
   I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

   ^6And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
   Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
   went both of them together.

   ^7And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he
   said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but
   where is the lamb for a burnt offering?

   ^8And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt
   offering: so they went both of them together.

   ^9And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham
   built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his
   son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

   ^10And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his
   son.

   ^11And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said,
   Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

   ^12And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any
   thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast
   not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

   ^13And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a
   ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the
   ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.

   ^14And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is
   said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

   ^15And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the
   second time,

   ^16And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou
   hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

   ^17That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will
   multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is
   upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

   ^18And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;
   because thou hast obeyed my voice.

   ^19So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went
   together to Beersheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.

   ^20And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham,
   saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother
   Nahor;

   ^21Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of
   Aram,

   ^22And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.

   ^23And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor,
   Abraham's brother.

   ^24And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and
   Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the
   years of the life of Sarah.

   ^2And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of
   Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.

   ^3And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of
   Heth, saying,

   ^4I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a
   buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.

   ^5And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,

   ^6Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of
   our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his
   sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

   ^7And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land,
   even to the children of Heth.

   ^8And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should
   bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the
   son of Zohar,

   ^9That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in
   the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it
   me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.

   ^10And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite
   answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all
   that went in at the gate of his city, saying,

   ^11Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is
   therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give
   I it thee: bury thy dead.

   ^12And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

   ^13And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land,
   saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give
   thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.

   ^14And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,

   ^15My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of
   silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

   ^16And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the
   silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four
   hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

   ^17And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before
   Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees
   that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were
   made sure

   ^18Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of
   Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.

   ^19And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the
   field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of
   Canaan.

   ^20And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
   Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the Lord had blessed
   Abraham in all things.

   ^2And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
   over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:

   ^3And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the
   God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
   daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:

   ^4But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife
   unto my son Isaac.

   ^5And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be
   willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again
   unto the land from whence thou camest?

   ^6And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son
   thither again.

   ^7The Lord God of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
   from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
   unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his
   angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.

   ^8And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt
   be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

   ^9And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master,
   and sware to him concerning that matter.

   ^10And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
   departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he
   arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.

   ^11And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of
   water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to
   draw water.

   ^12And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me
   good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.

   ^13Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the
   men of the city come out to draw water:

   ^14And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let
   down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say,
   Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that
   thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know
   that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.

   ^15And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold,
   Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of
   Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

   ^16And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any
   man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher,
   and came up.

   ^17And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee,
   drink a little water of thy pitcher.

   ^18And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
   pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

   ^19And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water
   for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

   ^20And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran
   again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

   ^21And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the Lord
   had made his journey prosperous or not.

   ^22And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man
   took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for
   her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;

   ^23And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there
   room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?

   ^24And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of
   Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.

   ^25She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough,
   and room to lodge in.

   ^26And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the Lord.

   ^27And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath
   not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the
   way, the Lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.

   ^28And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
   things.

   ^29And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out
   unto the man, unto the well.

   ^30And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his
   sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister,
   saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and,
   behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

   ^31And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; wherefore standest
   thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.

   ^32And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and
   gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet,
   and the men's feet that were with him.

   ^33And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not
   eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.

   ^34And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

   ^35And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great:
   and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and
   menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

   ^36And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old:
   and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

   ^37And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to
   my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:

   ^38But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and
   take a wife unto my son.

   ^39And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow
   me.

   ^40And he said unto me, The Lord, before whom I walk, will send his
   angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my
   son of my kindred, and of my father's house:

   ^41Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my
   kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my
   oath.

   ^42And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master
   Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:

   ^43Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass,
   that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give
   me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;

   ^44And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy
   camels: let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for
   my master's son.

   ^45And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came
   forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the
   well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.

   ^46And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and
   said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she
   made the camels drink also.

   ^47And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said,
   The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I
   put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

   ^48And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the
   Lord God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to
   take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

   ^49And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me:
   and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.

   ^50Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from
   the Lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

   ^51Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy
   master's son's wife, as the Lord hath spoken.

   ^52And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words,
   he worshipped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.

   ^53And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
   and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and
   to her mother precious things.

   ^54And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and
   tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send
   me away unto my master.

   ^55And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a
   few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

   ^56And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered
   my way; send me away that I may go to my master.

   ^57And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.

   ^58And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this
   man? And she said, I will go.

   ^59And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
   Abraham's servant, and his men.

   ^60And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be
   thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the
   gate of those which hate them.

   ^61And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels,
   and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.

   ^62And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahairoi; for he dwelt in
   the south country.

   ^63And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he
   lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

   ^64And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted
   off the camel.

   ^65For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in
   the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master:
   therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

   ^66And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.

   ^67And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took
   Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was
   comforted after his mother's death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.

   ^2And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and
   Ishbak, and Shuah.

   ^3And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were
   Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.

   ^4And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and
   Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.

   ^5And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.

   ^6But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave
   gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived,
   eastward, unto the east country.

   ^7And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived,
   an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

   ^8Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old
   man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

   ^9And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah,
   in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before
   Mamre;

   ^10The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was
   Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

   ^11And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his
   son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi.

   ^12Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar
   the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham:

   ^13And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names,
   according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and
   Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

   ^14And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,

   ^15Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:

   ^16These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their
   towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

   ^17And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and
   thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
   gathered unto his people.

   ^18And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou
   goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.

   ^19And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son: Abraham begat
   Isaac:

   ^20And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the
   daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the
   Syrian.

   ^21And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren:
   and the Lord was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.

   ^22And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it
   be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the Lord.

   ^23And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two
   manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people
   shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the
   younger.

   ^24And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were
   twins in her womb.

   ^25And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they
   called his name Esau.

   ^26And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
   Esau's heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore
   years old when she bare them.

   ^27And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
   field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

   ^28And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah
   loved Jacob.

   ^29And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was
   faint:

   ^30And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red
   pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.

   ^31And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.

   ^32And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit
   shall this birthright do to me?

   ^33And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he
   sold his birthright unto Jacob.

   ^34Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat
   and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his
   birthright.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in
   the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the
   Philistines unto Gerar.

   ^2And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt;
   dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:

   ^3Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee;
   for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and
   I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;

   ^4And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will
   give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the
   nations of the earth be blessed;

   ^5Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my
   commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

   ^6And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:

   ^7And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is
   my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men
   of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she was fair to look
   upon.

   ^8And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
   Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and,
   behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.

   ^9And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy
   wife: and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him,
   Because I said, Lest I die for her.

   ^10And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the
   people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have
   brought guiltiness upon us.

   ^11And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this
   man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

   ^12Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
   hundredfold: and the Lord blessed him.

   ^13And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became
   very great:

   ^14For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great
   store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.

   ^15For all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the days
   of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled
   them with earth.

   ^16And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much
   mightier than we.

   ^17And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of
   Gerar, and dwelt there.

   ^18And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in
   the days of Abraham his father; for the philistines had stopped them
   after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names
   by which his father had called them.

   ^19And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of
   springing water.

   ^20And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying,
   The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because
   they strove with him.

   ^21And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
   called the name of it Sitnah.

   ^22And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that
   they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said,
   For now the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the
   land.

   ^23And he went up from thence to Beersheba.

   ^24And the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the
   God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless
   thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

   ^25And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the Lord,
   and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's servants digged a well.

   ^26Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his
   friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.

   ^27And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate
   me, and have sent me away from you?

   ^28And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee: and we
   said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee,
   and let us make a covenant with thee;

   ^29That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we
   have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace:
   thou art now the blessed of the Lord.

   ^30And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

   ^31And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another:
   and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.

   ^32And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and
   told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him,
   We have found water.

   ^33And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beersheba
   unto this day.

   ^34And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the
   daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the
   Hittite:

   ^35Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so
   that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto
   him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I.

   ^2And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:

   ^3Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow,
   and go out to the field, and take me some venison;

   ^4And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I
   may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.

   ^5And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to
   the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

   ^6And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy
   father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,

   ^7Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless
   thee before the Lord before my death.

   ^8Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I
   command thee.

   ^9Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the
   goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he
   loveth:

   ^10And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he
   may bless thee before his death.

   ^11And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a
   hairy man, and I am a smooth man:

   ^12My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a
   deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.

   ^13And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only
   obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

   ^14And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his
   mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.

   ^15And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were
   with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:

   ^16And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and
   upon the smooth of his neck:

   ^17And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared,
   into the hand of her son Jacob.

   ^18And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here
   am I; who art thou, my son?

   ^19And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy firstborn; I have done
   according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my
   venison, that thy soul may bless me.

   ^20And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so
   quickly, my son? And he said, Because the Lord thy God brought it to
   me.

   ^21And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel
   thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.

   ^22And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and
   said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.

   ^23And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
   brother Esau's hands: so he blessed him.

   ^24And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.

   ^25And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's
   venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him,
   and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he drank.

   ^26And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my
   son.

   ^27And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his
   raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the
   smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed:

   ^28Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the
   earth, and plenty of corn and wine:

   ^29Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over
   thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be
   every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.

   ^30And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing
   Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his
   father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.

   ^31And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father,
   and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's
   venison, that thy soul may bless me.

   ^32And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am
   thy son, thy firstborn Esau.

   ^33And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that
   hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before
   thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be blessed.

   ^34And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great
   and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me
   also, O my father.

   ^35And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy
   blessing.

   ^36And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted
   me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he
   hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a
   blessing for me?

   ^37And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy
   lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with
   corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee,
   my son?

   ^38And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my
   father? bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his
   voice, and wept.

   ^39And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy
   dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven
   from above;

   ^40And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and
   it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou
   shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

   ^41And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father
   blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my
   father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.

   ^42And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she
   sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy
   brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill
   thee.

   ^43Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban
   my brother to Haran;

   ^44And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away;

   ^45Until thy brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget that
   which thou hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from
   thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?

   ^46And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the
   daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such
   as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my
   life do me?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto
   him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.

   ^2Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father;
   and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother's
   brother.

   ^3And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
   thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;

   ^4And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with
   thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger,
   which God gave unto Abraham.

   ^5And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son
   of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's
   mother.

   ^6When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to
   Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
   he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the
   daughters of Canaan;

   ^7And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to
   Padanaram;

   ^8And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his
   father;

   ^9Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had
   Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth,
   to be his wife.

   ^10And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.

   ^11And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night,
   because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and
   put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.

   ^12And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top
   of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and
   descending on it.

   ^13And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of
   Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest,
   to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;

   ^14And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt
   spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to
   the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the
   earth be blessed.

   ^15And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
   whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I
   will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee
   of.

   ^16And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is
   in this place; and I knew it not.

   ^17And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is
   none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.

   ^18And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he
   had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil
   upon the top of it.

   ^19And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that
   city was called Luz at the first.

   ^20And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep
   me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to
   put on,

   ^21So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the
   Lord be my God:

   ^22And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house:
   and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto
   thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of
   the east.

   ^2And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were
   three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered
   the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

   ^3And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone
   from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again
   upon the well's mouth in his place.

   ^4And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they said,
   Of Haran are we.

   ^5And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said,
   We know him.

   ^6And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well: and,
   behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.

   ^7And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the
   cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and feed
   them.

   ^8And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together,
   and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we water the
   sheep.

   ^9And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's
   sheep: for she kept them.

   ^10And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his
   mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that
   Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and
   watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.

   ^11And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.

   ^12And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he
   was Rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.

   ^13And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his
   sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed
   him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.

   ^14And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he
   abode with him the space of a month.

   ^15And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest
   thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?

   ^16And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the
   name of the younger was Rachel.

   ^17Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.

   ^18And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for
   Rachel thy younger daughter.

   ^19And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I
   should give her to another man: abide with me.

   ^20And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him
   but a few days, for the love he had to her.

   ^21And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are
   fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.

   ^22And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a
   feast.

   ^23And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter,
   and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

   ^24And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an
   handmaid.

   ^25And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and
   he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve
   with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?

   ^26And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the
   younger before the firstborn.

   ^27Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service
   which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.

   ^28And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his
   daughter to wife also.

   ^29And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her
   maid.

   ^30And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than
   Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.

   ^31And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but
   Rachel was barren.

   ^32And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben:
   for she said, Surely the Lord hath looked upon my affliction; now
   therefore my husband will love me.

   ^33And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the Lord
   hath heard that I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also:
   and she called his name Simeon.

   ^34And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time
   will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons:
   therefore was his name called Levi.

   ^35And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I
   praise the Lord: therefore she called his name Judah; and left bearing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her
   sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.

   ^2And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in
   God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?

   ^3And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall
   bear upon my knees that I may also have children by her.

   ^4And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto
   her.

   ^5And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.

   ^6And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice,
   and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.

   ^7And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second
   son.

   ^8And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my
   sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.

   ^9When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid,
   and gave her Jacob to wife.

   ^10And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son.

   ^11And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.

   ^12And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son.

   ^13And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed:
   and she called his name Asher.

   ^14And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in
   the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to
   Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

   ^15And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my
   husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And
   Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's
   mandrakes.

   ^16And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to
   meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired
   thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.

   ^17And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the
   fifth son.

   ^18And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my
   maiden to my husband: and she called his name Issachar.

   ^19And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.

   ^20And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
   husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she called
   his name Zebulun.

   ^21And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.

   ^22And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her
   womb.

   ^23And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my
   reproach:

   ^24And she called his name Joseph; and said, The Lord shall add to me
   another son.

   ^25And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said
   unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my
   country.

   ^26Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and
   let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.

   ^27And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in
   thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath
   blessed me for thy sake.

   ^28And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.

   ^29And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how
   thy cattle was with me.

   ^30For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now
   increased unto a multitude; and the Lord hath blessed thee since my
   coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?

   ^31And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not
   give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed
   and keep thy flock:

   ^32I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all
   the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the
   sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall
   be my hire.

   ^33So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it
   shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled
   and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be
   counted stolen with me.

   ^34And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.

   ^35And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
   spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and
   every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep,
   and gave them into the hand of his sons.

   ^36And he set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob
   fed the rest of Laban's flocks.

   ^37And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
   chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
   appear which was in the rods.

   ^38And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
   gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that
   they should conceive when they came to drink.

   ^39And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle
   ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.

   ^40And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks
   toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he
   put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's cattle.

   ^41And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive,
   that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters,
   that they might conceive among the rods.

   ^42But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler
   were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.

   ^43And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
   maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away
   all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's hath he
   gotten all this glory.

   ^2And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not
   toward him as before.

   ^3And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers,
   and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.

   ^4And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his
   flock,

   ^5And said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not
   toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.

   ^6And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.

   ^7And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but
   God suffered him not to hurt me.

   ^8If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle
   bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire;
   then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

   ^9Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to
   me.

   ^10And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I
   lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which
   leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

   ^11And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I
   said, Here am I.

   ^12And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which
   leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have
   seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.

   ^13I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where
   thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and
   return unto the land of thy kindred.

   ^14And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any
   portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?

   ^15Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath
   quite devoured also our money.

   ^16For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is
   ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee,
   do.

   ^17Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;

   ^18And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had
   gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padanaram,
   for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.

   ^19And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images
   that were her father's.

   ^20And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told
   him not that he fled.

   ^21So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the
   river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.

   ^22And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.

   ^23And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days'
   journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.

   ^24And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto
   him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

   ^25Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the
   mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.

   ^26And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen
   away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken
   with the sword?

   ^27Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and
   didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and
   with songs, with tabret, and with harp?

   ^28And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast
   now done foolishly in so doing.

   ^29It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your
   father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou
   speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

   ^30And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
   longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my
   gods?

   ^31And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I
   said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.

   ^32With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our
   brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For
   Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.

   ^33And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the
   two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of
   Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.

   ^34Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
   furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but
   found them not.

   ^35And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I
   cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he
   searched, but found not the images.

   ^36And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and
   said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so
   hotly pursued after me?

   ^37Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all
   thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren,
   that they may judge betwixt us both.

   ^38This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats
   have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.

   ^39That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the
   loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or
   stolen by night.

   ^40Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
   night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

   ^41Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen
   years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou
   hast changed my wages ten times.

   ^42Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of
   Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God
   hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
   yesternight.

   ^43And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my
   daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
   cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do this day
   unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?

   ^44Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let
   it be for a witness between me and thee.

   ^45And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

   ^46And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took
   stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

   ^47And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.

   ^48And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day.
   Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;

   ^49And Mizpah; for he said, The Lord watch between me and thee, when we
   are absent one from another.

   ^50If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
   wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness
   betwixt me and thee.

   ^51And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar,
   which I have cast betwixt me and thee;

   ^52This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not
   pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this
   heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.

   ^53The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father,
   judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.

   ^54Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren
   to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the
   mount.

   ^55And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his
   daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his
   place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.

   ^2And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he called
   the name of that place Mahanaim.

   ^3And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the
   land of Seir, the country of Edom.

   ^4And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau;
   Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed
   there until now:

   ^5And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and
   womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace
   in thy sight.

   ^6And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother
   Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.

   ^7Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
   people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
   into two bands;

   ^8And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the
   other company which is left shall escape.

   ^9And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father
   Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to
   thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee:

   ^10I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the
   truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I
   passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.

   ^11Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand
   of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother
   with the children.

   ^12And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as
   the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

   ^13And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to
   his hand a present for Esau his brother;

   ^14Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and
   twenty rams,

   ^15Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls,
   twenty she asses, and ten foals.

   ^16And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by
   themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a
   space betwixt drove and drove.

   ^17And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth
   thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither goest thou?
   and whose are these before thee?

   ^18Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present
   sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

   ^19And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed
   the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye
   find him.

   ^20And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he
   said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and
   afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.

   ^21So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night
   in the company.

   ^22And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
   womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.

   ^23And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that
   he had.

   ^24And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until
   the breaking of the day.

   ^25And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the
   hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint,
   as he wrestled with him.

   ^26And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will
   not let thee go, except thou bless me.

   ^27And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.

   ^28And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for
   as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.

   ^29And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And
   he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he
   blessed him there.

   ^30And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God
   face to face, and my life is preserved.

   ^31And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted
   upon his thigh.

   ^32Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank,
   which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he
   touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and
   with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and
   unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

   ^2And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and
   her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.

   ^3And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven
   times, until he came near to his brother.

   ^4And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and
   kissed him: and they wept.

   ^5And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and
   said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath
   graciously given thy servant.

   ^6Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
   bowed themselves.

   ^7And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and
   after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.

   ^8And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he
   said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

   ^9And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto
   thyself.

   ^10And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy
   sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen
   thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased
   with me.

   ^11Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God
   hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged
   him, and he took it.

   ^12And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go
   before thee.

   ^13And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender,
   and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should
   overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

   ^14Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will
   lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the
   children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.

   ^15And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are
   with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight
   of my lord.

   ^16So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.

   ^17And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made
   booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called
   Succoth.

   ^18And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of
   Canaan, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the
   city.

   ^19And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at
   the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred
   pieces of money.

   ^20And he erected there an altar, and called it Elelohe-Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to
   see the daughters of the land.

   ^2And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country,
   saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

   ^3And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the
   damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.

   ^4And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel
   to wife.

   ^5And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons
   were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they
   were come.

   ^6And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with
   him.

   ^7And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and
   the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought
   folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter; which thing ought not
   to be done.

   ^8And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem
   longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.

   ^9And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and
   take our daughters unto you.

   ^10And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell
   and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.

   ^11And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find
   grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.

   ^12Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye
   shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

   ^13And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father
   deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:

   ^14And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister
   to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:

   ^15But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that
   every male of you be circumcised;

   ^16Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your
   daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one
   people.

   ^17But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we
   take our daughter, and we will be gone.

   ^18And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.

   ^19And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
   delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the
   house of his father.

   ^20And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and
   communed with the men of their city, saying,

   ^21These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the
   land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for
   them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them
   our daughters.

   ^22Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be
   one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are
   circumcised.

   ^23Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs
   be ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.

   ^24And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out
   of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went
   out of the gate of his city.

   ^25And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two
   of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took each man
   his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.

   ^26And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword,
   and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out.

   ^27The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because
   they had defiled their sister.

   ^28They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
   which was in the city, and that which was in the field,

   ^29And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives
   took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

   ^30And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to
   stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the
   Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves
   together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my
   house.

   ^31And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there: and
   make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou
   fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.

   ^2Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him,
   Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change
   your garments:

   ^3And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an altar
   unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in
   the way which I went.

   ^4And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their
   hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid
   them under the oak which was by Shechem.

   ^5And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that
   were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.

   ^6So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is,
   Bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

   ^7And he built there an altar, and called the place Elbethel: because
   there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.

   ^8But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel
   under an oak: and the name of it was called Allonbachuth.

   ^9And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and
   blessed him.

   ^10And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be
   called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his
   name Israel.

   ^11And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply;
   a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall
   come out of thy loins;

   ^12And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it,
   and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.

   ^13And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

   ^14And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
   even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
   poured oil thereon.

   ^15And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him,
   Bethel.

   ^16And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little way to
   come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

   ^17And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife
   said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

   ^18And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died)
   that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin.

   ^19And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is
   Bethlehem.

   ^20And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
   Rachel's grave unto this day.

   ^21And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.

   ^22And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben
   went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel heard it.
   Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:

   ^23The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi,
   and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:

   ^24The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:

   ^25And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:

   ^26And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these are
   the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram.

   ^27And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of
   Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.

   ^28And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

   ^29And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
   people, being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried
   him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.

   ^2Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of
   Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of
   Zibeon the Hivite;

   ^3And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth.

   ^4And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;

   ^5And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons
   of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.

   ^6And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the
   persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his
   substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the
   country from the face of his brother Jacob.

   ^7For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and
   the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of
   their cattle.

   ^8Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.

   ^9And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in
   mount Seir:

   ^10These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife
   of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.

   ^11And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and
   Kenaz.

   ^12And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to
   Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife.

   ^13And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and
   Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.

   ^14And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the
   daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and
   Jaalam, and Korah.

   ^15These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the
   firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,

   ^16Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that
   came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.

   ^17And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah,
   duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in
   the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife.

   ^18And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush, duke
   Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the
   daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.

   ^19These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.

   ^20These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land;
   Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,

   ^21And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the
   Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.

   ^22And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister
   was Timna.

   ^23And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and
   Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.

   ^24And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was
   that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses
   of Zibeon his father.

   ^25And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the
   daughter of Anah.

   ^26And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and
   Ithran, and Cheran.

   ^27The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.

   ^28The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.

   ^29These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke
   Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,

   ^30Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came
   of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.

   ^31And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before
   there reigned any king over the children of Israel.

   ^32And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city
   was Dinhabah.

   ^33And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his
   stead.

   ^34And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his
   stead.

   ^35And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the
   field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was
   Avith.

   ^36And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.

   ^37And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his
   stead.

   ^38And Saul died, and Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.

   ^39And Baalhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his
   stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was
   Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

   ^40And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to
   their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke
   Alvah, duke Jetheth,

   ^41Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,

   ^42Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,

   ^43Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according to
   their habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the
   father of the Edomites.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the
   land of Canaan.

   ^2These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years
   old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
   sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and
   Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

   ^3Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was
   the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

   ^4And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all
   his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.

   ^5And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they
   hated him yet the more.

   ^6And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have
   dreamed:

   ^7For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf
   arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round
   about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

   ^8And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or
   shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the
   more for his dreams, and for his words.

   ^9And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said,
   Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon
   and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.

   ^10And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father
   rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast
   dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow
   down ourselves to thee to the earth?

   ^11And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.

   ^12And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.

   ^13And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in
   Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here
   am I.

   ^14And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy
   brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent
   him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

   ^15And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the
   field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?

   ^16And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they
   feed their flocks.

   ^17And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let
   us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in
   Dothan.

   ^18And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them,
   they conspired against him to slay him.

   ^19And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.

   ^20Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit,
   and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see
   what will become of his dreams.

   ^21And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and
   said, Let us not kill him.

   ^22And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit
   that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid
   him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.

   ^23And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that
   they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was
   on him;

   ^24And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty,
   there was no water in it.

   ^25And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and
   looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with
   their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down
   to Egypt.

   ^26And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our
   brother, and conceal his blood?

   ^27Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand
   be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were
   content.

   ^28Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
   lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for
   twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.

   ^29And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the
   pit; and he rent his clothes.

   ^30And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and
   I, whither shall I go?

   ^31And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and
   dipped the coat in the blood;

   ^32And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their
   father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
   coat or no.

   ^33And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath
   devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

   ^34And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and
   mourned for his son many days.

   ^35And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but
   he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the
   grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.

   ^36And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of
   Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his
   brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.

   ^2And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was
   Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.

   ^3And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.

   ^4And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name
   Onan.

   ^5And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name
   Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.

   ^6And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.

   ^7And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord; and
   the Lord slew him.

   ^8And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and marry
   her, and raise up seed to thy brother.

   ^9And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass,
   when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it on the
   ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.

   ^10And the thing which he did displeased the Lord: wherefore he slew
   him also.

   ^11Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy
   father's house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest
   peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt
   in her father's house.

   ^12And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife died; and
   Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he
   and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.

   ^13And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to
   Timnath to shear his sheep.

   ^14And she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her with
   a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the
   way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not
   given unto him to wife.

   ^15When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had
   covered her face.

   ^16And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let
   me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in
   law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in
   unto me?

   ^17And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said,
   Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?

   ^18And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy
   signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he
   gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.

   ^19And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put
   on the garments of her widowhood.

   ^20And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to
   receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not.

   ^21Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot,
   that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in
   this place.

   ^22And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the
   men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.

   ^23And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I
   sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.

   ^24And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told
   Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and
   also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her
   forth, and let her be burnt.

   ^25When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying,
   By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I
   pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.

   ^26And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous
   than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her
   again no more.

   ^27And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins
   were in her womb.

   ^28And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out his
   hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread,
   saying, This came out first.

   ^29And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his
   brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach
   be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez.

   ^30And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon
   his hand: and his name was called Zarah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of
   Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of
   the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

   ^2And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was
   in the house of his master the Egyptian.

   ^3And his master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made
   all that he did to prosper in his hand.

   ^4And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made
   him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.

   ^5And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in
   his house, and over all that he had, that the Lord blessed the
   Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the Lord was
   upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

   ^6And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not ought
   he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly
   person, and well favoured.

   ^7And it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife cast
   her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.

   ^8But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master
   wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all
   that he hath to my hand;

   ^9There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back
   any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I
   do this great wickedness, and sin against God?

   ^10And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he
   hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

   ^11And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house
   to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there
   within.

   ^12And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left
   his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

   ^13And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in
   her hand, and was fled forth,

   ^14That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them,
   saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came
   in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice:

   ^15And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and
   cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.

   ^16And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.

   ^17And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew
   servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:

   ^18And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left
   his garment with me, and fled out.

   ^19And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife,
   which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to
   me; that his wrath was kindled.

   ^20And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a place
   where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.

   ^21But the Lord was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him
   favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

   ^22And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the
   prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he
   was the doer of it.

   ^23The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his
   hand; because the Lord was with him, and that which he did, the Lord
   made it to prosper.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of
   Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.

   ^2And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief
   of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

   ^3And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard,
   into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.

   ^4And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served
   them: and they continued a season in ward.

   ^5And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one
   night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the
   butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the
   prison.

   ^6And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them,
   and, behold, they were sad.

   ^7And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of his
   lord's house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?

   ^8And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no
   interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations
   belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.

   ^9And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my
   dream, behold, a vine was before me;

   ^10And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded,
   and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth
   ripe grapes:

   ^11And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed
   them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

   ^12And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The
   three branches are three days:

   ^13Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore
   thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his
   hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler.

   ^14But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness,
   I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me
   out of this house:

   ^15For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and
   here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.

   ^16When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said
   unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white
   baskets on my head:

   ^17And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for
   Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.

   ^18And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof:
   The three baskets are three days:

   ^19Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee,
   and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from
   off thee.

   ^20And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday,
   that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head
   of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.

   ^21And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he
   gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand:

   ^22But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.

   ^23Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed:
   and, behold, he stood by the river.

   ^2And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine
   and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

   ^3And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river,
   ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the
   brink of the river.

   ^4And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well
   favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.

   ^5And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of
   corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

   ^6And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up
   after them.

   ^7And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And
   Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.

   ^8And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and
   he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men
   thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could
   interpret them unto Pharaoh.

   ^9Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my
   faults this day:

   ^10Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the
   captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker:

   ^11And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man
   according to the interpretation of his dream.

   ^12And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the
   captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our
   dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.

   ^13And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he
   restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

   ^14Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily
   out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and
   came in unto Pharaoh.

   ^15And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is
   none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou
   canst understand a dream to interpret it.

   ^16And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give
   Pharaoh an answer of peace.

   ^17And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the
   bank of the river:

   ^18And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed
   and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow:

   ^19And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill
   favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt
   for badness:

   ^20And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven
   fat kine:

   ^21And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had
   eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I
   awoke.

   ^22And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk,
   full and good:

   ^23And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east
   wind, sprung up after them:

   ^24And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto
   the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

   ^25And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath
   shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.

   ^26The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are
   seven years: the dream is one.

   ^27And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are
   seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall
   be seven years of famine.

   ^28This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is
   about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.

   ^29Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the
   land of Egypt:

   ^30And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the
   plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall
   consume the land;

   ^31And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that
   famine following; for it shall be very grievous.

   ^32And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because
   the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.

   ^33Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set
   him over the land of Egypt.

   ^34Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and
   take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous
   years.

   ^35And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and
   lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the
   cities.

   ^36And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years
   of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish
   not through the famine.

   ^37And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of
   all his servants.

   ^38And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this
   is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?

   ^39And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all
   this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art:

   ^40Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all
   my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.

   ^41And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land
   of Egypt.

   ^42And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
   Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a
   gold chain about his neck;

   ^43And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they
   cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land
   of Egypt.

   ^44And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall
   no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.

   ^45And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave him to
   wife Asenath the daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On. And Joseph went
   out over all the land of Egypt.

   ^46And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of
   Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went
   throughout all the land of Egypt.

   ^47And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
   handfuls.

   ^48And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in
   the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the
   field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

   ^49And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he
   left numbering; for it was without number.

   ^50And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came,
   which Asenath the daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On bare unto him.

   ^51And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said
   he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

   ^52And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me
   to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

   ^53And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt,
   were ended.

   ^54And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had
   said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt
   there was bread.

   ^55And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to
   Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto
   Joseph; what he saith to you, do.

   ^56And the famine was over all the face of the earth: And Joseph opened
   all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed
   sore in the land of Egypt.

   ^57And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because
   that the famine was so sore in all lands.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his
   sons, Why do ye look one upon another?

   ^2And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get
   you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not
   die.

   ^3And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.

   ^4But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for
   he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.

   ^5And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for
   the famine was in the land of Canaan.

   ^6And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to
   all the people of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down
   themselves before him with their faces to the earth.

   ^7And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself
   strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them,
   Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.

   ^8And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

   ^9And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said
   unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.

   ^10And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
   servants come.

   ^11We are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no
   spies.

   ^12And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye
   are come.

   ^13And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man
   in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our
   father, and one is not.

   ^14And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying,
   Ye are spies:

   ^15Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go
   forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.

   ^16Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
   kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any
   truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.

   ^17And he put them all together into ward three days.

   ^18And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I
   fear God:

   ^19If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of
   your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses:

   ^20But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be
   verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.

   ^21And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our
   brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us,
   and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

   ^22And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do
   not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold,
   also his blood is required.

   ^23And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto
   them by an interpreter.

   ^24And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to
   them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and
   bound him before their eyes.

   ^25Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore
   every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the
   way: and thus did he unto them.

   ^26And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

   ^27And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the
   inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

   ^28And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is
   even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
   saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?

   ^29And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and
   told him all that befell unto them; saying,

   ^30The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took
   us for spies of the country.

   ^31And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:

   ^32We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the
   youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.

   ^33And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I
   know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and
   take food for the famine of your households, and be gone:

   ^34And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye
   are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your
   brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

   ^35And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every
   man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their
   father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

   ^36And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my
   children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin
   away: all these things are against me.

   ^37And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I
   bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him
   to thee again.

   ^38And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is
   dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the
   which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
   grave.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 43

   And the famine was sore in the land.

   ^2And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had
   brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a
   little food.

   ^3And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto
   us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.

   ^4If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee
   food:

   ^5But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said
   unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.

   ^6And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the
   man whether ye had yet a brother?

   ^7And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our
   kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and
   we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly
   know that he would say, Bring your brother down?

   ^8And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we
   will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou,
   and also our little ones.

   ^9I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I
   bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the
   blame for ever:

   ^10For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second
   time.

   ^11And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do
   this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry
   down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and
   myrrh, nuts, and almonds:

   ^12And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought
   again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand;
   peradventure it was an oversight:

   ^13Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:

   ^14And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send
   away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children,
   I am bereaved.

   ^15And the men took that present, and they took double money in their
   hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood
   before Joseph.

   ^16And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his
   house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men
   shall dine with me at noon.

   ^17And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into
   Joseph's house.

   ^18And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's
   house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our
   sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion
   against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

   ^19And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they
   communed with him at the door of the house,

   ^20And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:

   ^21And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our
   sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our
   money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

   ^22And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we
   cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

   ^23And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of
   your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money.
   And he brought Simeon out unto them.

   ^24And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them
   water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

   ^25And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for
   they heard that they should eat bread there.

   ^26And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in
   their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.

   ^27And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well,
   the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?

   ^28And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is
   yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

   ^29And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his
   mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake
   unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.

   ^30And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother:
   and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept
   there.

   ^31And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and
   said, Set on bread.

   ^32And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and
   for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the
   Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an
   abomination unto the Egyptians.

   ^33And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright,
   and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at
   another.

   ^34And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but
   Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs. And they
   drank, and were merry with him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 44

   And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks
   with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his
   sack's mouth.

   ^2And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest,
   and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had
   spoken.

   ^3As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and
   their asses.

   ^4And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph
   said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost
   overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?

   ^5Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he
   divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

   ^6And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

   ^7And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God
   forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:

   ^8Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
   again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out
   of thy lord's house silver or gold?

   ^9With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we
   also will be my lord's bondmen.

   ^10And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he with
   whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

   ^11Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and
   opened every man his sack.

   ^12And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest:
   and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.

   ^13Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
   returned to the city.

   ^14And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was yet
   there: and they fell before him on the ground.

   ^15And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot
   ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?

   ^16And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?
   or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy
   servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with
   whom the cup is found.

   ^17And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose
   hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you
   up in peace unto your father.

   ^18Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy
   servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine
   anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.

   ^19My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?

   ^20And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child
   of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is
   left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

   ^21And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I
   may set mine eyes upon him.

   ^22And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he
   should leave his father, his father would die.

   ^23And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come
   down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

   ^24And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we
   told him the words of my lord.

   ^25And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.

   ^26And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us,
   then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except our
   youngest brother be with us.

   ^27And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me
   two sons:

   ^28And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in
   pieces; and I saw him not since:

   ^29And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall
   bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

   ^30Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be
   not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;

   ^31It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us,
   that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of
   thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

   ^32For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If
   I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for
   ever.

   ^33Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad
   a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

   ^34For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest
   peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 45

   Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by
   him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood
   no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.

   ^2And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.

   ^3And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet
   live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at
   his presence.

   ^4And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And
   they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold
   into Egypt.

   ^5Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold
   me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.

   ^6For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there
   are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.

   ^7And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth,
   and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

   ^8So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made
   me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
   throughout all the land of Egypt.

   ^9Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy
   son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me,
   tarry not:

   ^10And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near
   unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy
   flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:

   ^11And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of
   famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to
   poverty.

   ^12And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin,
   that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

   ^13And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all
   that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

   ^14And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin
   wept upon his neck.

   ^15Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after
   that his brethren talked with him.

   ^16And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's
   brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.

   ^17And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye;
   lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;

   ^18And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I
   will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat
   of the land.

   ^19Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land
   of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your
   father, and come.

   ^20Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is
   yours.

   ^21And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons,
   according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for
   the way.

   ^22To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin
   he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.

   ^23And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with
   the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread
   and meat for his father by the way.

   ^24So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto
   them, See that ye fall not out by the way.

   ^25And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto
   Jacob their father,

   ^26And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over
   all the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them
   not.

   ^27And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto
   them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him,
   the spirit of Jacob their father revived:

   ^28And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go
   and see him before I die.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 46

   And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
   Beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.

   ^2And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said,
   Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

   ^3And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down
   into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation:

   ^4I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring
   thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

   ^5And Jacob rose up from Beersheba: and the sons of Israel carried
   Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the
   wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.

   ^6And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in
   the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with
   him:

   ^7His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons'
   daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.

   ^8And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into
   Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.

   ^9And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.

   ^10And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and
   Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.

   ^11And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

   ^12And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and
   Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of
   Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.

   ^13And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.

   ^14And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.

   ^15These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram,
   with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters
   were thirty and three.

   ^16And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and
   Arodi, and Areli.

   ^17And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and
   Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.

   ^18These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter,
   and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.

   ^19The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.

   ^20And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim,
   which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him.

   ^21And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera,
   and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.

   ^22These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the
   souls were fourteen.

   ^23And the sons of Dan; Hushim.

   ^24And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.

   ^25These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his
   daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.

   ^26All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his
   loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore and
   six;

   ^27And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two
   souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were
   threescore and ten.

   ^28And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto
   Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.

   ^29And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his
   father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his
   neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

   ^30And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy
   face, because thou art yet alive.

   ^31And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house, I
   will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my
   father's house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;

   ^32And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle;
   and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they
   have.

   ^33And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall
   say, What is your occupation?

   ^34That ye shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from
   our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may
   dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto
   the Egyptians.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 47

   Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren,
   and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out
   of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.

   ^2And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them
   unto Pharaoh.

   ^3And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And they
   said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our
   fathers.

   ^4They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we
   come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine
   is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy
   servants dwell in the land of Goshen.

   ^5And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren
   are come unto thee:

   ^6The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy
   father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and
   if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers
   over my cattle.

   ^7And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh:
   and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

   ^8And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?

   ^9And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage
   are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the
   years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years
   of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

   ^10And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.

   ^11And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a
   possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
   of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.

   ^12And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his
   father's household, with bread, according to their families.

   ^13And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very
   sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by
   reason of the famine.

   ^14And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of
   Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and
   Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.

   ^15And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of
   Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread:
   for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.

   ^16And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your
   cattle, if money fail.

   ^17And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them
   bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of
   the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their
   cattle for that year.

   ^18When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and
   said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is
   spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left
   in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:

   ^19Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy
   us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto
   Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land
   be not desolate.

   ^20And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the
   Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over
   them: so the land became Pharaoh's.

   ^21And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the
   borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.

   ^22Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a
   portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
   Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.

   ^23Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day
   and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow
   the land.

   ^24And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the
   fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of
   the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for
   food for your little ones.

   ^25And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the
   sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.

   ^26And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that
   Pharaoh should have the fifth part; except the land of the priests
   only, which became not Pharaoh's.

   ^27And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and
   they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.

   ^28And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole
   age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

   ^29And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son
   Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put,
   I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with
   me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:

   ^30But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of
   Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as
   thou hast said.

   ^31And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed
   himself upon the bed's head.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 48

   And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph, Behold,
   thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and
   Ephraim.

   ^2And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto
   thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

   ^3And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in
   the land of Canaan, and blessed me,

   ^4And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply
   thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this
   land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.

   ^5And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee
   in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as
   Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.

   ^6And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and
   shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.

   ^7And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land
   of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto
   Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is
   Bethlehem.

   ^8And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?

   ^9And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath
   given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me,
   and I will bless them.

   ^10Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see.
   And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced
   them.

   ^11And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and,
   lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.

   ^12And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
   himself with his face to the earth.

   ^13And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's
   left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand,
   and brought them near unto him.

   ^14And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's
   head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head,
   guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.

   ^15And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham
   and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this
   day,

   ^16The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let
   my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac;
   and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.

   ^17And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
   head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
   to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.

   ^18And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the
   firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

   ^19And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he
   also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his
   younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a
   multitude of nations.

   ^20And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless,
   saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim
   before Manasseh.

   ^21And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with
   you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

   ^22Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which
   I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 49

   And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together,
   that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.

   ^2Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken
   unto Israel your father.

   ^3Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my
   strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:

   ^4Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to
   thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

   ^5Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their
   habitations.

   ^6O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine
   honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in
   their selfwill they digged down a wall.

   ^7Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was
   cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

   ^8Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be
   in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down
   before thee.

   ^9Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he
   stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse
   him up?

   ^10The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between
   his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the
   people be.

   ^11Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice
   vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of
   grapes:

   ^12His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.

   ^13Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an
   haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.

   ^14Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:

   ^15And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant;
   and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.

   ^16Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

   ^17Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth
   the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

   ^18I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.

   ^19Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.

   ^20Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
   dainties.

   ^21Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

   ^22Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose
   branches run over the wall:

   ^23The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

   ^24But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made
   strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the
   shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

   ^25Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the
   Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
   blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
   of the womb:

   ^26The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my
   progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall
   be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was
   separate from his brethren.

   ^27Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the
   prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

   ^28All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their
   father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his
   blessing he blessed them.

   ^29And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my
   people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of
   Ephron the Hittite,

   ^30In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before
   Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of
   Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.

   ^31There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried
   Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.

   ^32The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from
   the children of Heth.

   ^33And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered
   up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered
   unto his people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 50

   And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed
   him.

   ^2And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
   father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.

   ^3And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days
   of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him
   threescore and ten days.

   ^4And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the
   house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes,
   speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,

   ^5My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have
   digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now
   therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will
   come again.

   ^6And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made
   thee swear.

   ^7And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the
   servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the
   land of Egypt,

   ^8And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's
   house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they
   left in the land of Goshen.

   ^9And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a
   very great company.

   ^10And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan,
   and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he
   made a mourning for his father seven days.

   ^11And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the
   mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning
   to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abelmizraim,
   which is beyond Jordan.

   ^12And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:

   ^13For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in
   the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field
   for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.

   ^14And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that
   went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.

   ^15And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
   said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
   all the evil which we did unto him.

   ^16And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did
   command before he died, saying,

   ^17So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass
   of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now,
   we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy
   father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.

   ^18And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they
   said, Behold, we be thy servants.

   ^19And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?

   ^20But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto
   good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.

   ^21Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones.
   And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

   ^22And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and Joseph
   lived an hundred and ten years.

   ^23And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the
   children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon
   Joseph's knees.

   ^24And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit
   you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to
   Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

   ^25And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will
   surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

   ^26So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
   embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Second Book of Moses, Called

Exodus
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into
   Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.

   ^2Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

   ^3Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

   ^4Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

   ^5And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy
   souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.

   ^6And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

   ^7And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly,
   and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled
   with them.

   ^8Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.

   ^9And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of
   Israel are more and mightier than we:

   ^10Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it
   come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto
   our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land.

   ^11Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
   their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and
   Raamses.

   ^12But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew.
   And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.

   ^13And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:

   ^14And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and
   in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service,
   wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.

   ^15And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the
   name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:

   ^16And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women,
   and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him:
   but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

   ^17But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt
   commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

   ^18And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them,
   Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?

   ^19And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not
   as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the
   midwives come in unto them.

   ^20Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people
   multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

   ^21And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made
   them houses.

   ^22And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born
   ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter
   of Levi.

   ^2And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he
   was a goodly child, she hid him three months.

   ^3And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
   bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child
   therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

   ^4And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

   ^5And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river;
   and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the
   ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

   ^6And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe
   wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the
   Hebrews' children.

   ^7Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to
   thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for
   thee?

   ^8And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called
   the child's mother.

   ^9And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse
   it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the
   child, and nursed it.

   ^10And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and
   he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because
   I drew him out of the water.

   ^11And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he
   went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied
   an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.

   ^12And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was
   no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

   ^13And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews
   strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore
   smitest thou thy fellow?

   ^14And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest
   thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and
   said, Surely this thing is known.

   ^15Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But
   Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian:
   and he sat down by a well.

   ^16Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew
   water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

   ^17And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and
   helped them, and watered their flock.

   ^18And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye
   are come so soon to day?

   ^19And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the
   shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.

   ^20And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that ye
   have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

   ^21And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses
   Zipporah his daughter.

   ^22And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said,
   I have been a stranger in a strange land.

   ^23And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died:
   and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they
   cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.

   ^24And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with
   Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

   ^25And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of
   Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to
   the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

   ^2And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of
   the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with
   fire, and the bush was not consumed.

   ^3And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why
   the bush is not burnt.

   ^4And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto
   him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said,
   Here am I.

   ^5And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
   feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

   ^6Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the
   God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was
   afraid to look upon God.

   ^7And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people
   which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
   taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;

   ^8And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,
   and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large,
   unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the
   Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and
   the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

   ^9Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto
   me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress
   them.

   ^10Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou
   mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.

   ^11And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh,
   and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?

   ^12And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a
   token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth
   the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.

   ^13And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of
   Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me
   unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say
   unto them?

   ^14And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt
   thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.

   ^15And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the
   children of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham,
   the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
   my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

   ^16Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The
   Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,
   appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that
   which is done to you in Egypt:

   ^17And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt
   unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites,
   and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land
   flowing with milk and honey.

   ^18And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and
   the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto
   him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go,
   we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may
   sacrifice to the Lord our God.

   ^19And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by
   a mighty hand.

   ^20And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders
   which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you
   go.

   ^21And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians:
   and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:

   ^22But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
   sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
   raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters;
   and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor
   hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared
   unto thee.

   ^2And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said,
   A rod.

   ^3And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and
   it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.

   ^4And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by
   the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod
   in his hand:

   ^5That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of
   Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto
   thee.

   ^6And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy
   bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out,
   behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

   ^7And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand
   into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it
   was turned again as his other flesh.

   ^8And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
   hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
   voice of the latter sign.

   ^9And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
   signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the
   water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which
   thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

   ^10And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither
   heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow
   of speech, and of a slow tongue.

   ^11And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh
   the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord?

   ^12Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what
   thou shalt say.

   ^13And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom
   thou wilt send.

   ^14And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is
   not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And
   also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he
   will be glad in his heart.

   ^15And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I
   will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
   shall do.

   ^16And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even
   he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
   instead of God.

   ^17And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do
   signs.

   ^18And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said
   unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are
   in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses,
   Go in peace.

   ^19And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for
   all the men are dead which sought thy life.

   ^20And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and
   he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his
   hand.

   ^21And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt,
   see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in
   thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the
   people go.

   ^22And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my
   son, even my firstborn:

   ^23And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if
   thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy
   firstborn.

   ^24And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the Lord met him,
   and sought to kill him.

   ^25Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
   son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art
   thou to me.

   ^26So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because
   of the circumcision.

   ^27And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.
   And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.

   ^28And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him, and
   all the signs which he had commanded him.

   ^29And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the
   children of Israel:

   ^30And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses,
   and did the signs in the sight of the people.

   ^31And the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had
   visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their
   affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the
   Lord God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto
   me in the wilderness.

   ^2And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to
   let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

   ^3And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we
   pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the
   Lord our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.

   ^4And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and
   Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

   ^5And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye
   make them rest from their burdens.

   ^6And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and
   their officers, saying,

   ^7Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore:
   let them go and gather straw for themselves.

   ^8And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall
   lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle;
   therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.

   ^9Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
   therein; and let them not regard vain words.

   ^10And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and
   they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give
   you straw.

   ^11Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
   work shall be diminished.

   ^12So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt
   to gather stubble instead of straw.

   ^13And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your
   daily tasks, as when there was straw.

   ^14And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's
   taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore
   have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to
   day, as heretofore?

   ^15Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto
   Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?

   ^16There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make
   brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine
   own people.

   ^17But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us go
   and do sacrifice to the Lord.

   ^18Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you,
   yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

   ^19And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in
   evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your
   bricks of your daily task.

   ^20And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
   forth from Pharaoh:

   ^21And they said unto them, The Lord look upon you, and judge; because
   ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in
   the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.

   ^22And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, wherefore hast
   thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?

   ^23For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil
   to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to
   Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong
   hand shall he drive them out of his land.

   ^2And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord:

   ^3And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name
   of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

   ^4And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the
   land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
   strangers.

   ^5And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom
   the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.

   ^6Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will
   bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid
   you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out
   arm, and with great judgments:

   ^7And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God:
   and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out
   from under the burdens of the Egyptians.

   ^8And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did
   swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it
   you for an heritage: I am the Lord.

   ^9And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened
   not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

   ^10And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^11Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of
   Israel go out of his land.

   ^12And Moses spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of
   Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who
   am of uncircumcised lips?

   ^13And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge
   unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring
   the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

   ^14These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben the
   firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the
   families of Reuben.

   ^15And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and
   Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families
   of Simeon.

   ^16And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their
   generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life
   of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

   ^17The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.

   ^18And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel:
   and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three
   years.

   ^19And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of
   Levi according to their generations.

   ^20And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
   bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an
   hundred and thirty and seven years.

   ^21And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.

   ^22And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.

   ^23And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of
   Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and
   Ithamar.

   ^24And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are
   the families of the Korhites.

   ^25And Eleazar Aaron's son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to
   wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of
   the Levites according to their families.

   ^26These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring out the
   children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.

   ^27These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out
   the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.

   ^28And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the
   land of Egypt,

   ^29That the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I am the Lord: speak thou
   unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.

   ^30And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips,
   and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh:
   and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.

   ^2Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall
   speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his
   land.

   ^3And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
   wonders in the land of Egypt.

   ^4But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon
   Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
   Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.

   ^5And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth
   mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among
   them.

   ^6And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.

   ^7And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three
   years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.

   ^8And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^9When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you:
   then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before
   Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.

   ^10And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the
   Lord had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and
   before his servants, and it became a serpent.

   ^11Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
   magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their
   enchantments.

   ^12For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but
   Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

   ^13And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as
   the Lord had said.

   ^14And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
   refuseth to let the people go.

   ^15Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
   water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
   the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

   ^16And thou shalt say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent
   me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the
   wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

   ^17Thus saith the Lord, In this thou shalt know that I am the Lord:
   behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
   which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

   ^18And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
   stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
   river.

   ^19And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and
   stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams,
   upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
   water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
   throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
   vessels of stone.

   ^20And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted up
   the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of
   Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were
   in the river were turned to blood.

   ^21And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and
   the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was
   blood throughout all the land of Egypt.

   ^22And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and
   Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
   Lord had said.

   ^23And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his
   heart to this also.

   ^24And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to
   drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

   ^25And seven days were fulfilled, after that the Lord had smitten the
   river.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus
   saith the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

   ^2And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy
   borders with frogs:

   ^3And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up
   and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed,
   and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine
   ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:

   ^4And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and
   upon all thy servants.

   ^5And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine
   hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
   ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.

   ^6And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the
   frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

   ^7And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
   frogs upon the land of Egypt.

   ^8Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the Lord,
   that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will
   let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the Lord.

   ^9And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for
   thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs
   from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only?

   ^10And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word:
   that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the Lord our God.

   ^11And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from
   thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.

   ^12And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the
   Lord because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.

   ^13And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died
   out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

   ^14And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

   ^15But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart,
   and hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.

   ^16And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod,
   and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all
   the land of Egypt.

   ^17And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and
   smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast;
   all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

   ^18And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
   lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

   ^19Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and
   Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the
   Lord had said.

   ^20And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
   stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
   him, Thus saith the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

   ^21Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms
   of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and
   into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of
   swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

   ^22And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people
   dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest
   know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth.

   ^23And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to
   morrow shall this sign be.

   ^24And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into
   the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all the
   land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.

   ^25And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye,
   sacrifice to your God in the land.

   ^26And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the
   abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God: lo, shall we
   sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will
   they not stone us?

   ^27We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to
   the Lord our God, as he shall command us.

   ^28And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
   Lord your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away:
   intreat for me.

   ^29And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the
   Lord that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his
   servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal
   deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
   Lord.

   ^30And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord.

   ^31And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the
   swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people;
   there remained not one.

   ^32And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he
   let the people go.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Then the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus
   saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may
   serve me.

   ^2For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still,

   ^3Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the
   field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen,
   and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

   ^4And the Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle
   of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the children's of
   Israel.

   ^5And the Lord appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the Lord shall
   do this thing in the land.

   ^6And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
   Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.

   ^7And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the
   Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not
   let the people go.

   ^8And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of
   ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in
   the sight of Pharaoh.

   ^9And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be
   a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout
   all the land of Egypt.

   ^10And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and
   Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
   forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

   ^11And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils;
   for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.

   ^12And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not
   unto them; as the Lord had spoken unto Moses.

   ^13And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and
   stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of the
   Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

   ^14For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
   upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
   there is none like me in all the earth.

   ^15For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy
   people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

   ^16And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew
   in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the
   earth.

   ^17As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not
   let them go?

   ^18Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very
   grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation
   thereof even until now.

   ^19Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in
   the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
   field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
   them, and they shall die.

   ^20He that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh
   made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses:

   ^21And he that regarded not the word of the Lord left his servants and
   his cattle in the field.

   ^22And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward
   heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and
   upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of
   Egypt.

   ^23And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the Lord sent
   thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the Lord
   rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

   ^24So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
   such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became
   a nation.

   ^25And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in
   the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
   field, and brake every tree of the field.

   ^26Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was
   there no hail.

   ^27And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto
   them, I have sinned this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my
   people are wicked.

   ^28Intreat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
   thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no
   longer.

   ^29And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I
   will spread abroad my hands unto the Lord; and the thunder shall cease,
   neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that
   the earth is the Lord'S.

   ^30But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear
   the Lord God.

   ^31And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the
   ear, and the flax was bolled.

   ^32But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown
   up.

   ^33And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his
   hands unto the Lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was
   not poured upon the earth.

   ^34And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
   were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
   servants.

   ^35And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
   children of Israel go; as the Lord had spoken by Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened
   his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my
   signs before him:

   ^2And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's
   son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have
   done among them; that ye may know how that I am the Lord.

   ^3And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus
   saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble
   thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

   ^4Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I
   bring the locusts into thy coast:

   ^5And they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able
   to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is
   escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every
   tree which groweth for you out of the field:

   ^6And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants,
   and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy
   fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth
   unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.

   ^7And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a
   snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God:
   knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?

   ^8And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto
   them, Go, serve the Lord your God: but who are they that shall go?

   ^9And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our
   sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we
   go; for we must hold a feast unto the Lord.

   ^10And he said unto them, Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let
   you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

   ^11Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the Lord; for that ye did
   desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.

   ^12And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land
   of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt,
   and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.

   ^13And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the
   Lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
   night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

   ^14And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in
   all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
   were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

   ^15For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was
   darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of
   the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green
   thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land
   of Egypt.

   ^16Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I
   have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.

   ^17Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and
   intreat the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this death
   only.

   ^18And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord.

   ^19And the Lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the
   locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust
   in all the coasts of Egypt.

   ^20But the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
   children of Israel go.

   ^21And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven,
   that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which
   may be felt.

   ^22And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a
   thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days:

   ^23They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three
   days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.

   ^24And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the Lord; only
   let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go
   with you.

   ^25And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
   offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God.

   ^26Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left
   behind; for thereof must we take to serve the Lord our God; and we know
   not with what we must serve the Lord, until we come thither.

   ^27But the Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.

   ^28And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself,
   see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.

   ^29And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no
   more.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon
   Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he
   shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.

   ^2Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his
   neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and
   jewels of gold.

   ^3And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians.
   Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the
   sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

   ^4And Moses said, Thus saith the Lord, About midnight will I go out
   into the midst of Egypt:

   ^5And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the
   firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the
   firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the
   firstborn of beasts.

   ^6And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such
   as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

   ^7But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his
   tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the Lord doth
   put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.

   ^8And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
   themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that
   follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh
   in a great anger.

   ^9And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
   that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.

   ^10And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the
   Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of
   Israel go out of his land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,

   ^2This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the
   first month of the year to you.

   ^3Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth
   day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according
   to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house:

   ^4And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his
   neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the
   souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the
   lamb.

   ^5Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
   shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats:

   ^6And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month:
   and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in
   the evening.

   ^7And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts
   and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.

   ^8And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and
   unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.

   ^9Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire;
   his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.

   ^10And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that
   which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

   ^11And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your
   feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is
   the Lord'S passover.

   ^12For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite
   all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against
   all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord.

   ^13And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye
   are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague
   shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.

   ^14And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it
   a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
   feast by an ordinance for ever.

   ^15Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye
   shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened
   bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut
   off from Israel.

   ^16And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the
   seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of
   work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that
   only may be done of you.

   ^17And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this
   selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt:
   therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance
   for ever.

   ^18In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye
   shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
   month at even.

   ^19Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
   whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
   off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
   in the land.

   ^20Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat
   unleavened bread.

   ^21Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them,
   Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the
   passover.

   ^22And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is
   in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the
   blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of
   his house until the morning.

   ^23For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he
   seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the Lord
   will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in
   unto your houses to smite you.

   ^24And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy
   sons for ever.

   ^25And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the
   Lord will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
   this service.

   ^26And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you,
   What mean ye by this service?

   ^27That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord'S passover, who
   passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he
   smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the
   head and worshipped.

   ^28And the children of Israel went away, and did as the Lord had
   commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

   ^29And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the
   firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat
   on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
   dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

   ^30And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all
   the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a
   house where there was not one dead.

   ^31And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and
   get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel;
   and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said.

   ^32Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone;
   and bless me also.

   ^33And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send
   them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.

   ^34And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their
   kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

   ^35And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and
   they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
   and raiment:

   ^36And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians,
   so that they lent unto them such things as they required. And they
   spoiled the Egyptians.

   ^37And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about
   six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

   ^38And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds,
   even very much cattle.

   ^39And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought
   forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust
   out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for
   themselves any victual.

   ^40Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt,
   was four hundred and thirty years.

   ^41And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years,
   even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord
   went out from the land of Egypt.

   ^42It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them
   out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the Lord to be
   observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.

   ^43And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the
   passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof:

   ^44But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast
   circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.

   ^45A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

   ^46In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of
   the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
   thereof.

   ^47All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.

   ^48And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
   passover to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
   him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
   land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

   ^49One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that
   sojourneth among you.

   ^50Thus did all the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses and
   Aaron, so did they.

   ^51And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the Lord did bring the
   children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among
   the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

   ^3And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came
   out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand
   the Lord brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened bread
   be eaten.

   ^4This day came ye out in the month Abib.

   ^5And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the
   Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and
   the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land
   flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this
   month.

   ^6Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day
   shall be a feast to the Lord.

   ^7Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no
   leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen
   with thee in all thy quarters.

   ^8And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because
   of that which the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.

   ^9And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
   memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord'S law may be in thy mouth:
   for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought thee out of Egypt.

   ^10Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to
   year.

   ^11And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the
   Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it
   thee,

   ^12That thou shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix,
   and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males
   shall be the Lord'S.

   ^13And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if
   thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the
   firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.

   ^14And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying,
   What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the
   Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:

   ^15And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the
   Lord slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of
   man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all
   that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my
   children I redeem.

   ^16And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
   between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth
   out of Egypt.

   ^17And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God
   led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although
   that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when
   they see war, and they return to Egypt:

   ^18But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of
   the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the
   land of Egypt.

   ^19And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly
   sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye
   shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

   ^20And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in
   the edge of the wilderness.

   ^21And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead
   them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to
   go by day and night:

   ^22He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of
   fire by night, from before the people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before
   Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baalzephon: before
   it shall ye encamp by the sea.

   ^3For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in
   the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

   ^4And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after them;
   and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the
   Egyptians may know that I am the Lord. And they did so.

   ^5And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart
   of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they
   said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving
   us?

   ^6And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:

   ^7And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of
   Egypt, and captains over every one of them.

   ^8And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he
   pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went
   out with an high hand.

   ^9But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of
   Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by
   the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baalzephon.

   ^10And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their
   eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore
   afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord.

   ^11And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt,
   hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou
   dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?

   ^12Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us
   alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us
   to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

   ^13And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see
   the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day: for the
   Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for
   ever.

   ^14The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

   ^15And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak
   unto the children of Israel, that they go forward:

   ^16But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea,
   and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground
   through the midst of the sea.

   ^17And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they
   shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all
   his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

   ^18And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten
   me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

   ^19And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed
   and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before
   their face, and stood behind them:

   ^20And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of
   Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by
   night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night.

   ^21And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused
   the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the
   sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

   ^22And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the
   dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand,
   and on their left.

   ^23And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of
   the sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.

   ^24And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto
   the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud,
   and troubled the host of the Egyptians,

   ^25And took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so
   that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the
   Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians.

   ^26And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea,
   that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots,
   and upon their horsemen.

   ^27And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
   returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians
   fled against it; and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of
   the sea.

   ^28And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen,
   and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there
   remained not so much as one of them.

   ^29But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the
   sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on
   their left.

   ^30Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
   Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

   ^31And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the
   Egyptians: and the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and
   his servant Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and
   spake, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed
   gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

   ^2The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he
   is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father's God, and I
   will exalt him.

   ^3The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name.

   ^4Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen
   captains also are drowned in the Red sea.

   ^5The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.

   ^6Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand,
   O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.

   ^7And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them
   that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed
   them as stubble.

   ^8And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together,
   the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in
   the heart of the sea.

   ^9The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
   spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my
   hand shall destroy them.

   ^10Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as
   lead in the mighty waters.

   ^11Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? who is like thee,
   glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

   ^12Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

   ^13Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast
   redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy
   habitation.

   ^14The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the
   inhabitants of Palestina.

   ^15Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab,
   trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan
   shall melt away.

   ^16Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm
   they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O Lord,
   till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.

   ^17Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
   inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to
   dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.

   ^18The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

   ^19For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his
   horsemen into the sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea
   upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of
   the sea.

   ^20And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in
   her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with
   dances.

   ^21And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed
   gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

   ^22So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the
   wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and
   found no water.

   ^23And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of
   Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.

   ^24And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?

   ^25And he cried unto the Lord; and the Lord shewed him a tree, which
   when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he
   made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,

   ^26And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord
   thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give
   ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of
   these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for
   I am the Lord that healeth thee.

   ^27And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
   threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the
   children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between
   Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their
   departing out of the land of Egypt.

   ^2And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against
   Moses and Aaron in the wilderness:

   ^3And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died
   by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh
   pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us
   forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

   ^4Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven
   for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every
   day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no.

   ^5And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare
   that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather
   daily.

   ^6And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even,
   then ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out from the land of
   Egypt:

   ^7And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the Lord; for that
   he heareth your murmurings against the Lord: and what are we, that ye
   murmur against us?

   ^8And Moses said, This shall be, when the Lord shall give you in the
   evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that
   the Lord heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what
   are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.

   ^9And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the
   children of Israel, Come near before the Lord: for he hath heard your
   murmurings.

   ^10And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of
   the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and,
   behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud.

   ^11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^12I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto
   them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall
   be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.

   ^13And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered
   the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

   ^14And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the
   wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on
   the ground.

   ^15And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It
   is manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This
   is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.

   ^16This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded, Gather of it every
   man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to the
   number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his
   tents.

   ^17And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some
   less.

   ^18And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had
   nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered
   every man according to his eating.

   ^19And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.

   ^20Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left
   of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was
   wroth with them.

   ^21And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his
   eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.

   ^22And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as
   much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the
   congregation came and told Moses.

   ^23And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To
   morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord: bake that which
   ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which
   remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

   ^24And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not
   stink, neither was there any worm therein.

   ^25And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the
   Lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

   ^26Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the
   sabbath, in it there shall be none.

   ^27And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the
   seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

   ^28And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my
   commandments and my laws?

   ^29See, for that the Lord hath given you the sabbath, therefore he
   giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man
   in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.

   ^30So the people rested on the seventh day.

   ^31And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was
   like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made
   with honey.

   ^32And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commandeth, Fill an
   omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread
   wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth
   from the land of Egypt.

   ^33And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna
   therein, and lay it up before the Lord, to be kept for your
   generations.

   ^34As the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the
   Testimony, to be kept.

   ^35And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they
   came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
   borders of the land of Canaan.

   ^36Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the
   wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment
   of the Lord, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the
   people to drink.

   ^2Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water
   that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me?
   wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?

   ^3And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured
   against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up
   out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?

   ^4And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What shall I do unto this
   people? they be almost ready to stone me.

   ^5And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with
   thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the
   river, take in thine hand, and go.

   ^6Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and
   thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that
   the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of
   Israel.

   ^7And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of
   the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the
   Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?

   ^8Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.

   ^9And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with
   Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of
   God in mine hand.

   ^10So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and
   Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.

   ^11And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel
   prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.

   ^12But Moses' hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under
   him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one
   on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were
   steady until the going down of the sun.

   ^13And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the
   sword.

   ^14And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book,
   and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the
   remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.

   ^15And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovahnissi:

   ^16For he said, Because the Lord hath sworn that the Lord will have war
   with Amalek from generation to generation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father in law, heard of all
   that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the
   Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt;

   ^2Then Jethro, Moses' father in law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after
   he had sent her back,

   ^3And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he
   said, I have been an alien in a strange land:

   ^4And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said
   he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:

   ^5And Jethro, Moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife
   unto Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:

   ^6And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee,
   and thy wife, and her two sons with her.

   ^7And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and
   kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came
   into the tent.

   ^8And Moses told his father in law all that the Lord had done unto
   Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and all the travail
   that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them.

   ^9And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to
   Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.

   ^10And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord, who hath delivered you out of
   the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath
   delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.

   ^11Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods: for in the thing
   wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

   ^12And Jethro, Moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
   sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to
   eat bread with Moses' father in law before God.

   ^13And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the
   people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the
   evening.

   ^14And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he
   said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
   thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
   even?

   ^15And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto
   me to enquire of God:

   ^16When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one
   and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.

   ^17And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is
   not good.

   ^18Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with
   thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to
   perform it thyself alone.

   ^19Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall
   be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest
   bring the causes unto God:

   ^20And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them
   the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.

   ^21Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as
   fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them,
   to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,
   and rulers of tens:

   ^22And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that
   every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter
   they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall
   bear the burden with thee.

   ^23If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou
   shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their
   place in peace.

   ^24So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all
   that he had said.

   ^25And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over
   the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties,
   and rulers of tens.

   ^26And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they
   brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

   ^27And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his
   own land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of
   the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.

   ^2For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of
   Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped
   before the mount.

   ^3And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the
   mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell
   the children of Israel;

   ^4Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
   eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself.

   ^5Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,
   then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all
   the earth is mine:

   ^6And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.
   These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.

   ^7And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid
   before their faces all these words which the Lord commanded him.

   ^8And all the people answered together, and said, All that the Lord
   hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto
   the Lord.

   ^9And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud,
   that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for
   ever. And Moses told the words of the people unto the Lord.

   ^10And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them
   to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes,

   ^11And be ready against the third day: for the third day the Lord will
   come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.

   ^12And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take
   heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the
   border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to
   death:

   ^13There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or
   shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the
   trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

   ^14And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified
   the people; and they washed their clothes.

   ^15And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come
   not at your wives.

   ^16And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were
   thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the
   voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in
   the camp trembled.

   ^17And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God;
   and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

   ^18And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
   descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
   of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

   ^19And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and
   louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

   ^20And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount:
   and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went
   up.

   ^21And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they
   break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

   ^22And let the priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify
   themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them.

   ^23And Moses said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount
   Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and
   sanctify it.

   ^24And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come
   up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people
   break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them.

   ^25So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   And God spake all these words, saying,

   ^2I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of
   Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

   ^3Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

   ^4Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of
   any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
   that is in the water under the earth:

   ^5Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the
   Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
   upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
   hate me;

   ^6And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
   commandments.

   ^7Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
   Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

   ^8Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

   ^9Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

   ^10But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou
   shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
   manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that
   is within thy gates:

   ^11For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
   that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed
   the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

   ^12Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
   land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

   ^13Thou shalt not kill.

   ^14Thou shalt not commit adultery.

   ^15Thou shalt not steal.

   ^16Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

   ^17Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy
   neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox,
   nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

   ^18And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the
   noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw
   it, they removed, and stood afar off.

   ^19And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but
   let not God speak with us, lest we die.

   ^20And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove
   you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.

   ^21And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick
   darkness where God was.

   ^22And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children
   of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.

   ^23Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto
   you gods of gold.

   ^24An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice
   thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and
   thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee,
   and I will bless thee.

   ^25And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it
   of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted
   it.

   ^26Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy
   nakedness be not discovered thereon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.

   ^2If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the
   seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

   ^3If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were
   married, then his wife shall go out with him.

   ^4If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or
   daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he
   shall go out by himself.

   ^5And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and
   my children; I will not go out free:

   ^6Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring
   him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his
   ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever.

   ^7And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go
   out as the menservants do.

   ^8If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then
   shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he
   shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

   ^9And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her
   after the manner of daughters.

   ^10If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of
   marriage, shall he not diminish.

   ^11And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free
   without money.

   ^12He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.

   ^13And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand;
   then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

   ^14But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him
   with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

   ^15And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put
   to death.

   ^16And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in
   his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

   ^17And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put
   to death.

   ^18And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or
   with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:

   ^19If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that
   smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and
   shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

   ^20And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die
   under his hand; he shall be surely punished.

   ^21Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be
   punished: for he is his money.

   ^22If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart
   from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished,
   according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as
   the judges determine.

   ^23And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,

   ^24Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,

   ^25Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

   ^26And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid,
   that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.

   ^27And if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's
   tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.

   ^28If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be
   surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the
   ox shall be quit.

   ^29But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it
   hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that
   he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner
   also shall be put to death.

   ^30If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the
   ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.

   ^31Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to
   this judgment shall it be done unto him.

   ^32If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give
   unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.

   ^33And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not
   cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein;

   ^34The owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the
   owner of them; and the dead beast shall be his.

   ^35And if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall
   sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they
   shall divide.

   ^36Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and
   his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the
   dead shall be his own.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he
   shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

   ^2If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there
   shall no blood be shed for him.

   ^3If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for
   he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be
   sold for his theft.

   ^4If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox,
   or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.

   ^5If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put
   in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best of his
   own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make
   restitution.

   ^6If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn,
   or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that
   kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.

   ^7If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and
   it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him pay
   double.

   ^8If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
   brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his
   neighbour's goods.

   ^9For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep,
   for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another challengeth
   to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and
   whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.

   ^10If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or
   any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man
   seeing it:

   ^11Then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath
   not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and the owner of it shall
   accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.

   ^12And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
   owner thereof.

   ^13If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he
   shall not make good that which was torn.

   ^14And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die,
   the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.

   ^15But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if
   it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.

   ^16And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her,
   he shall surely endow her to be his wife.

   ^17If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay
   money according to the dowry of virgins.

   ^18Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

   ^19Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.

   ^20He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the Lord only, he shall
   be utterly destroyed.

   ^21Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
   strangers in the land of Egypt.

   ^22Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

   ^23If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I
   will surely hear their cry;

   ^24And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and
   your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

   ^25If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou
   shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him
   usury.

   ^26If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt
   deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down:

   ^27For that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin:
   wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto
   me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.

   ^28Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.

   ^29Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of
   thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.

   ^30Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven
   days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.

   ^31And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh
   that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked
   to be an unrighteous witness.

   ^2Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou
   speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment:

   ^3Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.

   ^4If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt
   surely bring it back to him again.

   ^5If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden,
   and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.

   ^6Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.

   ^7Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous
   slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked.

   ^8And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and
   perverteth the words of the righteous.

   ^9Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a
   stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

   ^10And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the
   fruits thereof:

   ^11But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the
   poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field
   shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with
   thy oliveyard.

   ^12Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt
   rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy
   handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

   ^13And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make
   no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of
   thy mouth.

   ^14Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

   ^15Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat
   unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed
   of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shall
   appear before me empty:)

   ^16And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou
   hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the
   end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the
   field.

   ^17Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord
   GOD.

   ^18Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread;
   neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.

   ^19The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the
   house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's
   milk.

   ^20Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to
   bring thee into the place which I have prepared.

   ^21Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not
   pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

   ^22But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak;
   then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine
   adversaries.

   ^23For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the
   Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the
   Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.

   ^24Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after
   their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break
   down their images.

   ^25And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread,
   and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.

   ^26There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land:
   the number of thy days I will fulfil.

   ^27I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to
   whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their
   backs unto thee.

   ^28And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the
   Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.

   ^29I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the
   land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.

   ^30By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until
   thou be increased, and inherit the land.

   ^31And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the
   Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the
   inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out
   before thee.

   ^32Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

   ^33They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against
   me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab,
   and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar
   off.

   ^2And Moses alone shall come near the Lord: but they shall not come
   nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

   ^3And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all
   the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said,
   All the words which the Lord hath said will we do.

   ^4And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the
   morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars,
   according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

   ^5And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt
   offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord.

   ^6And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of
   the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

   ^7And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the
   people: and they said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be
   obedient.

   ^8And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said,
   Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you
   concerning all these words.

   ^9Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the
   elders of Israel:

   ^10And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it
   were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of
   heaven in his clearness.

   ^11And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand:
   also they saw God, and did eat and drink.

   ^12And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be
   there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
   commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.

   ^13And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into
   the mount of God.

   ^14And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come
   again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man
   have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

   ^15And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

   ^16And the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud
   covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of
   the midst of the cloud.

   ^17And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on
   the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.

   ^18And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the
   mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of
   every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my
   offering.

   ^3And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and
   silver, and brass,

   ^4And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,

   ^5And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,

   ^6Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,

   ^7Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the
   breastplate.

   ^8And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.

   ^9According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the
   tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so
   shall ye make it.

   ^10And they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half
   shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
   thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

   ^11And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt
   thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.

   ^12And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the
   four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and
   two rings in the other side of it.

   ^13And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with
   gold.

   ^14And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the
   ark, that the ark may be borne with them.

   ^15The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken
   from it.

   ^16And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give
   thee.

   ^17And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half
   shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
   thereof.

   ^18And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou
   make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.

   ^19And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the
   other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the
   two ends thereof.

   ^20And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering
   the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to
   another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.

   ^21And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark
   thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.

   ^22And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
   above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the
   ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in
   commandment unto the children of Israel.

   ^23Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be
   the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a
   half the height thereof.

   ^24And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown
   of gold round about.

   ^25And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about,
   and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.

   ^26And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in
   the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.

   ^27Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves
   to bear the table.

   ^28And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
   with gold, that the table may be borne with them.

   ^29And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and
   covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt
   thou make them.

   ^30And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.

   ^31And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall
   the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his
   knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.

   ^32And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches
   of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the
   candlestick out of the other side:

   ^33Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one
   branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a
   knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the
   candlestick.

   ^34And in the candlestick shall be four bowls made like unto almonds,
   with their knops and their flowers.

   ^35And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop
   under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the
   same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the
   candlestick.

   ^36Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be
   one beaten work of pure gold.

   ^37And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light
   the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.

   ^38And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure
   gold.

   ^39Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.

   ^40And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed
   thee in the mount.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine
   twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of
   cunning work shalt thou make them.

   ^2The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the
   breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall
   have one measure.

   ^3The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other
   five curtains shall be coupled one to another.

   ^4And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain
   from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the
   uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

   ^5Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt
   thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the
   second; that the loops may take hold one of another.

   ^6And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains
   together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.

   ^7And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon the
   tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.

   ^8The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of
   one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one
   measure.

   ^9And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains
   by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of
   the tabernacle.

   ^10And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that
   is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain
   which coupleth the second.

   ^11And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into
   the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.

   ^12And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half
   curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.

   ^13And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that
   which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall
   hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to
   cover it.

   ^14And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red,
   and a covering above of badgers' skins.

   ^15And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood
   standing up.

   ^16Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half
   shall be the breadth of one board.

   ^17Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against
   another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

   ^18And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on
   the south side southward.

   ^19And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards;
   two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under
   another board for his two tenons.

   ^20And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there
   shall be twenty boards:

   ^21And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and
   two sockets under another board.

   ^22And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six
   boards.

   ^23And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in
   the two sides.

   ^24And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be
   coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be
   for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

   ^25And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen
   sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another
   board.

   ^26And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the
   one side of the tabernacle,

   ^27And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,
   and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two
   sides westward.

   ^28And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end
   to end.

   ^29And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of
   gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with
   gold.

   ^30And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion
   thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.

   ^31And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
   fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:

   ^32And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid
   with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of
   silver.

   ^33And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest
   bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail
   shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.

   ^34And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in
   the most holy place.

   ^35And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick
   over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south:
   and thou shalt put the table on the north side.

   ^36And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue,
   and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with
   needlework.

   ^37And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood,
   and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and thou
   shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and
   five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height
   thereof shall be three cubits.

   ^2And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof:
   his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.

   ^3And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels,
   and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels
   thereof thou shalt make of brass.

   ^4And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon the
   net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.

   ^5And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that
   the net may be even to the midst of the altar.

   ^6And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and
   overlay them with brass.

   ^7And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be
   upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.

   ^8Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the
   mount, so shall they make it.

   ^9And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side
   southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of
   an hundred cubits long for one side:

   ^10And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of
   brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.

   ^11And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of
   an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets
   of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

   ^12And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings
   of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.

   ^13And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be
   fifty cubits.

   ^14The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their
   pillars three, and their sockets three.

   ^15And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their
   pillars three, and their sockets three.

   ^16And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits,
   of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with
   needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.

   ^17All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver;
   their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.

   ^18The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth
   fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and
   their sockets of brass.

   ^19All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and
   all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass.

   ^20And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee
   pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.

   ^21In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is
   before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to
   morning before the Lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their
   generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from
   among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the
   priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar,
   Aaron's sons.

   ^2And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and
   for beauty.

   ^3And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have
   filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments
   to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

   ^4And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and
   an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and
   they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that
   he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

   ^5And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
   linen.

   ^6And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
   scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.

   ^7It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges
   thereof; and so it shall be joined together.

   ^8And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of
   the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and
   purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

   ^9And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of
   the children of Israel:

   ^10Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest
   on the other stone, according to their birth.

   ^11With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a
   signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the
   children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.

   ^12And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod
   for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall
   bear their names before the Lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial.

   ^13And thou shalt make ouches of gold;

   ^14And two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou
   make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.

   ^15And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work;
   after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and
   of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make
   it.

   ^16Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length
   thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.

   ^17And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of
   stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
   this shall be the first row.

   ^18And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

   ^19And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

   ^20And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be
   set in gold in their inclosings.

   ^21And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel,
   twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet;
   every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.

   ^22And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
   wreathen work of pure gold.

   ^23And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and
   shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.

   ^24And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings
   which are on the ends of the breastplate.

   ^25And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten
   in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod
   before it.

   ^26And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon
   the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the
   side of the ephod inward.

   ^27And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on
   the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
   over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of
   the ephod.

   ^28And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the
   rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the
   curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed
   from the ephod.

   ^29And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the
   breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
   place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.

   ^30And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the
   Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before
   the Lord: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel
   upon his heart before the Lord continually.

   ^31And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.

   ^32And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof:
   it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it
   were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

   ^33And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue,
   and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells
   of gold between them round about:

   ^34A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate,
   upon the hem of the robe round about.

   ^35And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard
   when he goeth in unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he
   cometh out, that he die not.

   ^36And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like
   the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE Lord.

   ^37And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre;
   upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.

   ^38And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the
   iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow
   in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that
   they may be accepted before the Lord.

   ^39And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make
   the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.

   ^40And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for
   them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for
   beauty.

   ^41And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with
   him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them,
   that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

   ^42And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness;
   from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach:

   ^43And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
   unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto
   the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity,
   and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after
   him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to
   minister unto me in the priest's office: Take one young bullock, and
   two rams without blemish,

   ^2And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and
   wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make
   them.

   ^3And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
   basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

   ^4And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

   ^5And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and
   the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him
   with the curious girdle of the ephod:

   ^6And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown
   upon the mitre.

   ^7Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head,
   and anoint him.

   ^8And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.

   ^9And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put
   the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a
   perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.

   ^10And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle
   of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon
   the head of the bullock.

   ^11And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord, by the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^12And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the
   horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the
   bottom of the altar.

   ^13And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the
   caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is
   upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

   ^14But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou
   burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

   ^15Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their
   hands upon the head of the ram.

   ^16And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and
   sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

   ^17And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him,
   and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.

   ^18And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt
   offering unto the Lord: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire
   unto the Lord.

   ^19And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put
   their hands upon the head of the ram.

   ^20Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon
   the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of
   his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great
   toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round
   about.

   ^21And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the
   anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and
   upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall
   be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments
   with him.

   ^22Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat
   that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two
   kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it
   is a ram of consecration:

   ^23And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer
   out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the Lord:

   ^24And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of
   his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the Lord.

   ^25And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the
   altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the Lord: it is
   an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^26And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecration,
   and wave it for a wave offering before the Lord: and it shall be thy
   part.

   ^27And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the
   shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up,
   of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of
   that which is for his sons:

   ^28And it shall be Aaron's and his sons' by a statute for ever from the
   children of Israel: for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an
   heave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their
   peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the Lord.

   ^29And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons' after him, to be
   anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.

   ^30And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven
   days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to
   minister in the holy place.

   ^31And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his
   flesh in the holy place.

   ^32And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread
   that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation.

   ^33And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to
   consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof,
   because they are holy.

   ^34And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread,
   remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire:
   it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

   ^35And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all
   things which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate
   them.

   ^36And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for
   atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an
   atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.

   ^37Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify
   it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar
   shall be holy.

   ^38Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of
   the first year day by day continually.

   ^39The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb
   thou shalt offer at even:

   ^40And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth
   part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for
   a drink offering.

   ^41And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto
   according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the
   drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire
   unto the Lord.

   ^42This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations
   at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord:
   where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

   ^43And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the
   tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

   ^44And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
   altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me
   in the priest's office.

   ^45And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their
   God.

   ^46And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them
   forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am the
   Lord their God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood
   shalt thou make it.

   ^2A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof;
   foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the
   horns thereof shall be of the same.

   ^3And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the
   sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make
   unto it a crown of gold round about.

   ^4And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by
   the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it;
   and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.

   ^5And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with
   gold.

   ^6And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the
   testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I
   will meet with thee.

   ^7And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he
   dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.

   ^8And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon
   it, a perpetual incense before the Lord throughout your generations.

   ^9Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor
   meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

   ^10And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
   year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year
   shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most
   holy unto the Lord.

   ^11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^12When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their
   number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the
   Lord, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them,
   when thou numberest them.

   ^13This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are
   numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is
   twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord.

   ^14Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty
   years old and above, shall give an offering unto the Lord.

   ^15The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than
   half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the Lord, to make an
   atonement for your souls.

   ^16And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel,
   and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
   congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel
   before the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.

   ^17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^18Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass,
   to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the
   congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

   ^19For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
   thereat:

   ^20When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall
   wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar
   to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord:

   ^21So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not:
   and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed
   throughout their generations.

   ^22Moreover the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^23Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five
   hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred
   and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels,

   ^24And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the
   sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin:

   ^25And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound
   after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.

   ^26And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith,
   and the ark of the testimony,

   ^27And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his
   vessels, and the altar of incense,

   ^28And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver
   and his foot.

   ^29And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever
   toucheth them shall be holy.

   ^30And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that
   they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

   ^31And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall
   be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

   ^32Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any
   other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be
   holy unto you.

   ^33Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it
   upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.

   ^34And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte,
   and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of
   each shall there be a like weight:

   ^35And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the
   apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy:

   ^36And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the
   testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with
   thee: it shall be unto you most holy.

   ^37And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to
   yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee
   holy for the Lord.

   ^38Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be
   cut off from his people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur,
   of the tribe of Judah:

   ^3And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in
   understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,

   ^4To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
   brass,

   ^5And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to
   work in all manner of workmanship.

   ^6And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach,
   of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I
   have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee;

   ^7The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and
   the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the
   tabernacle,

   ^8And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all
   his furniture, and the altar of incense,

   ^9And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver
   and his foot,

   ^10And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the
   priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
   office,

   ^11And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place:
   according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.

   ^12And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^13Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my
   sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout
   your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth
   sanctify you.

   ^14Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every
   one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth
   any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

   ^15Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of
   rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he
   shall surely be put to death.

   ^16Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe
   the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.

   ^17It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in
   six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
   rested, and was refreshed.

   ^18And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with
   him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written
   with the finger of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
   mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said
   unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this
   Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not
   what is become of him.

   ^2And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in
   the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring
   them unto me.

   ^3And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their
   ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

   ^4And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving
   tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy
   gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

   ^5And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made
   proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord.

   ^6And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings,
   and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to
   drink, and rose up to play.

   ^7And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people,
   which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted
   themselves:

   ^8They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them:
   they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have
   sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have
   brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

   ^9And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold,
   it is a stiffnecked people:

   ^10Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them,
   and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.

   ^11And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy
   wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of
   the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?

   ^12Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he
   bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from
   the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this
   evil against thy people.

   ^13Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou
   swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your
   seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of
   will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

   ^14And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
   people.

   ^15And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables
   of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on both
   their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

   ^16And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing
   of God, graven upon the tables.

   ^17And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he
   said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.

   ^18And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
   neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
   noise of them that sing do I hear.

   ^19And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he
   saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast
   the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

   ^20And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire,
   and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the
   children of Israel drink of it.

   ^21And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou
   hast brought so great a sin upon them?

   ^22And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest
   the people, that they are set on mischief.

   ^23For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for
   as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt,
   we wot not what is become of him.

   ^24And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
   off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came
   out this calf.

   ^25And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made
   them naked unto their shame among their enemies:)

   ^26Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the
   Lord'S side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered
   themselves together unto him.

   ^27And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every
   man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
   throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
   companion, and every man his neighbour.

   ^28And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and
   there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

   ^29For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the Lord, even
   every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon
   you a blessing this day.

   ^30And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people,
   Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the Lord;
   peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.

   ^31And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Oh, this people have
   sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

   ^32Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me, I
   pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

   ^33And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him
   will I blot out of my book.

   ^34Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have
   spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless
   in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.

   ^35And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf, which
   Aaron made.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the
   people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the
   land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto
   thy seed will I give it:

   ^2And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the
   Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite,
   and the Jebusite:

   ^3Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the
   midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee
   in the way.

   ^4And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no
   man did put on him his ornaments.

   ^5For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye
   are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a
   moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from
   thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

   ^6And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by
   the mount Horeb.

   ^7And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar
   off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation.
   And it came to pass, that every one which sought the Lord went out unto
   the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp.

   ^8And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that
   all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and
   looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.

   ^9And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy
   pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord
   talked with Moses.

   ^10And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle
   door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent
   door.

   ^11And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto
   his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua,
   the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.

   ^12And Moses said unto the Lord, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up
   this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me.
   Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace
   in my sight.

   ^13Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew
   me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy
   sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.

   ^14And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee
   rest.

   ^15And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not
   up hence.

   ^16For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found
   grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we
   be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the
   face of the earth.

   ^17And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou
   hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by
   name.

   ^18And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.

   ^19And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I
   will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to
   whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.

   ^20And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see
   me, and live.

   ^21And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt
   stand upon a rock:

   ^22And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will
   put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while
   I pass by:

   ^23And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts:
   but my face shall not be seen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto
   the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in
   the first tables, which thou brakest.

   ^2And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount
   Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

   ^3And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen
   throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before
   that mount.

   ^4And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose
   up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the Lord had
   commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

   ^5And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and
   proclaimed the name of the Lord.

   ^6And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord
   God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and
   truth,

   ^7Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and
   sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity
   of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children,
   unto the third and to the fourth generation.

   ^8And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and
   worshipped.

   ^9And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my
   Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and
   pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

   ^10And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will
   do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any
   nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of
   the Lord: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.

   ^11Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out
   before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the
   Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.

   ^12Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants
   of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of
   thee:

   ^13But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down
   their groves:

   ^14For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, whose name is
   Jealous, is a jealous God:

   ^15Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they
   go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and
   one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;

   ^16And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters
   go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after
   their gods.

   ^17Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

   ^18The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt
   eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month
   Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.

   ^19All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy
   cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

   ^20But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if
   thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn
   of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.

   ^21Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in
   earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

   ^22And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of
   wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.

   ^23Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the
   Lord GOD, the God of Israel.

   ^24For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy
   borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up
   to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year.

   ^25Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither
   shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the
   morning.

   ^26The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the
   house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's
   milk.

   ^27And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the
   tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.

   ^28And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did
   neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the
   words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

   ^29And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the
   two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the
   mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he
   talked with him.

   ^30And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the
   skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

   ^31And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the
   congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.

   ^32And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them
   in commandment all that the Lord had spoken with him in mount Sinai.

   ^33And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
   face.

   ^34But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took
   the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the
   children of Israel that which he was commanded.

   ^35And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of
   Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he
   went in to speak with him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel
   together, and said unto them, These are the words which the Lord hath
   commanded, that ye should do them.

   ^2Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to
   you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord: whosoever doeth work
   therein shall be put to death.

   ^3Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath
   day.

   ^4And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel,
   saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying,

   ^5Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord: whosoever is of a
   willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the Lord; gold, and
   silver, and brass,

   ^6And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,

   ^7And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shittim wood,

   ^8And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the
   sweet incense,

   ^9And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the
   breastplate.

   ^10And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the
   Lord hath commanded;

   ^11The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his
   boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets,

   ^12The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail
   of the covering,

   ^13The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,

   ^14The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his
   lamps, with the oil for the light,

   ^15And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and
   the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of
   the tabernacle,

   ^16The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and
   all his vessels, the laver and his foot,

   ^17The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the
   hanging for the door of the court,

   ^18The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their
   cords,

   ^19The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy
   garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
   minister in the priest's office.

   ^20And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the
   presence of Moses.

   ^21And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one
   whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the Lord'S offering to
   the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his
   service, and for the holy garments.

   ^22And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted,
   and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels
   of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto
   the Lord.

   ^23And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet,
   and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers'
   skins, brought them.

   ^24Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the
   Lord'S offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for
   any work of the service, brought it.

   ^25And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands,
   and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and
   of scarlet, and of fine linen.

   ^26And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats'
   hair.

   ^27And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the
   ephod, and for the breastplate;

   ^28And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for
   the sweet incense.

   ^29The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the Lord,
   every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
   manner of work, which the Lord had commanded to be made by the hand of
   Moses.

   ^30And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the Lord hath
   called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of
   Judah;

   ^31And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in
   understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;

   ^32And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
   brass,

   ^33And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood,
   to make any manner of cunning work.

   ^34And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and
   Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.

   ^35Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of
   work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the
   embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and
   of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise
   cunning work.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom
   the Lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of
   work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the Lord
   had commanded.

   ^2And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in
   whose heart the Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred
   him up to come unto the work to do it:

   ^3And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of
   Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to
   make it withal. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every
   morning.

   ^4And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
   came every man from his work which they made;

   ^5And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than
   enough for the service of the work, which the Lord commanded to make.

   ^6And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed
   throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more
   work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained
   from bringing.

   ^7For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it,
   and too much.

   ^8And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the
   tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and
   purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.

   ^9The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the
   breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.

   ^10And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other
   five curtains he coupled one unto another.

   ^11And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the
   selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of
   another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

   ^12Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the
   edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the loops
   held one curtain to another.

   ^13And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto
   another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.

   ^14And he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the
   tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

   ^15The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the
   breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.

   ^16And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by
   themselves.

   ^17And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in
   the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain
   which coupleth the second.

   ^18And he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that
   it might be one.

   ^19And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a
   covering of badgers' skins above that.

   ^20And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up.

   ^21The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one
   cubit and a half.

   ^22One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did
   he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

   ^23And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south
   side southward:

   ^24And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two
   sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under
   another board for his two tenons.

   ^25And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north
   corner, he made twenty boards,

   ^26And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and
   two sockets under another board.

   ^27And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.

   ^28And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two
   sides.

   ^29And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head
   thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.

   ^30And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets
   of silver, under every board two sockets.

   ^31And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one
   side of the tabernacle,

   ^32And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle,
   and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.

   ^33And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one
   end to the other.

   ^34And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold
   to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.

   ^35And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
   linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.

   ^36And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid
   them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four
   sockets of silver.

   ^37And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple,
   and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework;

   ^38And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their
   chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of
   brass.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was
   the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit
   and a half the height of it:

   ^2And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a
   crown of gold to it round about.

   ^3And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners
   of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the
   other side of it.

   ^4And he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

   ^5And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear
   the ark.

   ^6And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was
   the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

   ^7And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he
   them, on the two ends of the mercy seat;

   ^8One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other
   end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the
   two ends thereof.

   ^9And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with
   their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even
   to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.

   ^10And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length
   thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the
   height thereof:

   ^11And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of
   gold round about.

   ^12Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and
   made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.

   ^13And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the
   four corners that were in the four feet thereof.

   ^14Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to
   bear the table.

   ^15And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold,
   to bear the table.

   ^16And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and
   his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure
   gold.

   ^17And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the
   candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his
   flowers, were of the same:

   ^18And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of
   the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the
   candlestick out of the other side thereof:

   ^19Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop
   and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a
   knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the
   candlestick.

   ^20And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops,
   and his flowers:

   ^21And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two
   branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same,
   according to the six branches going out of it.

   ^22Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one
   beaten work of pure gold.

   ^23And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes,
   of pure gold.

   ^24Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.

   ^25And he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was
   a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two
   cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.

   ^26And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides
   thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown
   of gold round about.

   ^27And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the
   two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the
   staves to bear it withal.

   ^28And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

   ^29And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet
   spices, according to the work of the apothecary.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   And he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits
   was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was
   foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.

   ^2And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns
   thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

   ^3And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels,
   and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels
   thereof made he of brass.

   ^4And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass
   thereof beneath unto the midst of it.

   ^5And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to be
   places for the staves.

   ^6And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.

   ^7And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to
   bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.

   ^8And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the
   lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of
   the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^9And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of
   the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits:

   ^10Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the
   hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.

   ^11And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their
   pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of
   the pillars and their fillets of silver.

   ^12And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars
   ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
   of silver.

   ^13And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.

   ^14The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their
   pillars three, and their sockets three.

   ^15And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that
   hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their
   sockets three.

   ^16All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.

   ^17And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the
   pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their
   chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted
   with silver.

   ^18And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue,
   and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was
   the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable
   to the hangings of the court.

   ^19And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four; their
   hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their
   fillets of silver.

   ^20And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about,
   were of brass.

   ^21This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of
   testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses,
   for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron
   the priest.

   ^22And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
   made all that the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^23And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an
   engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in
   purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

   ^24All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the
   holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents,
   and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the
   sanctuary.

   ^25And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an
   hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and
   fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:

   ^26A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of
   the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty
   years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and
   five hundred and fifty men.

   ^27And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the
   sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the
   hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

   ^28And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made
   hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.

   ^29And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand
   and four hundred shekels.

   ^30And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of
   the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it,
   and all the vessels of the altar,

   ^31And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the
   court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the
   court round about.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service,
   to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron;
   as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^2And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
   fine twined linen.

   ^3And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires,
   to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in
   the fine linen, with cunning work.

   ^4They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two
   edges was it coupled together.

   ^5And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the
   same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and
   scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^6And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as
   signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.

   ^7And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be
   stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded
   Moses.

   ^8And he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the
   ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

   ^9It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the
   length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.

   ^10And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius,
   a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.

   ^11And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

   ^12And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

   ^13And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were
   inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.

   ^14And the stones were according to the names of the children of
   Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
   signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.

   ^15And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen
   work of pure gold.

   ^16And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the
   two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.

   ^17And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the
   ends of the breastplate.

   ^18And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two
   ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.

   ^19And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the
   breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod
   inward.

   ^20And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides
   of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the
   other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

   ^21And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the
   ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of
   the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod;
   as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^22And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

   ^23And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an
   habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.

   ^24And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and
   purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

   ^25And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the
   pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
   pomegranates;

   ^26A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the
   hem of the robe to minister in; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^27And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for
   his sons,

   ^28And a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen, and
   linen breeches of fine twined linen,

   ^29And a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and
   scarlet, of needlework; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^30And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote
   upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE
   Lord.

   ^31And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the
   mitre; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^32Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the
   congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all
   that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.

   ^33And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his
   furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his
   sockets,

   ^34And the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of
   badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering,

   ^35The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy
   seat,

   ^36The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,

   ^37The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to
   be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,

   ^38And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense,
   and the hanging for the tabernacle door,

   ^39The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his
   vessels, the laver and his foot,

   ^40The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the
   hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the
   vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the
   congregation,

   ^41The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy
   garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons' garments, to minister in
   the priest's office.

   ^42According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of
   Israel made all the work.

   ^43And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it
   as the Lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle
   of the tent of the congregation.

   ^3And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the
   ark with the vail.

   ^4And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that
   are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
   candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

   ^5And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark
   of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.

   ^6And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of
   the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

   ^7And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
   the altar, and shalt put water therein.

   ^8And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging
   at the court gate.

   ^9And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and
   all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof:
   and it shall be holy.

   ^10And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his
   vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.

   ^11And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.

   ^12And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

   ^13And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and
   sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

   ^14And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:

   ^15And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
   they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing
   shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.

   ^16Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did
   he.

   ^17And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the
   first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.

   ^18And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and
   set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up
   his pillars.

   ^19And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the
   covering of the tent above upon it; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^20And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves
   on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark:

   ^21And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of
   the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the Lord
   commanded Moses.

   ^22And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side
   of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.

   ^23And he set the bread in order upon it before the Lord; as the Lord
   had commanded Moses.

   ^24And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over
   against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.

   ^25And he lighted the lamps before the Lord; as the Lord commanded
   Moses.

   ^26And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before
   the vail:

   ^27And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^28And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

   ^29And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle
   of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering
   and the meat offering; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^30And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the
   altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

   ^31And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet
   thereat:

   ^32When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came
   near unto the altar, they washed; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^33And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar,
   and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.

   ^34Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of
   the Lord filled the tabernacle.

   ^35And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation,
   because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the
   tabernacle.

   ^36And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the
   children of Israel went onward in all their journeys:

   ^37But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the
   day that it was taken up.

   ^38For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire
   was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout
   all their journeys.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Second Book of Moses, called

Leviticus
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   And the Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the
   tabernacle of the congregation, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of
   you bring an offering unto the Lord, ye shall bring your offering of
   the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock.

   ^3If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
   male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at
   the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord.

   ^4And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it
   shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.

   ^5And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord: and the priests,
   Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about
   upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation.

   ^6And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.

   ^7And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and
   lay the wood in order upon the fire:

   ^8And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the
   fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the
   altar:

   ^9But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest
   shall burn all on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made
   by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^10And if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of
   the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without
   blemish.

   ^11And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the
   Lord: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall sprinkle his blood round
   about upon the altar.

   ^12And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and
   the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire
   which is upon the altar:

   ^13But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the
   priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar: it is a burnt
   sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^14And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls,
   then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons.

   ^15And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his
   head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung
   out at the side of the altar:

   ^16And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it
   beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes:

   ^17And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide
   it asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood
   that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by
   fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And when any will offer a meat offering unto the Lord, his offering
   shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put
   frankincense thereon:

   ^2And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the priests: and he shall take
   thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with
   all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall burn the memorial of
   it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
   unto the Lord:

   ^3And the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his sons':
   it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.

   ^4And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven,
   it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or
   unleavened wafers anointed with oil.

   ^5And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be of
   fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.

   ^6Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat
   offering.

   ^7And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it
   shall be made of fine flour with oil.

   ^8And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things
   unto the Lord: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring
   it unto the altar.

   ^9And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof,
   and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by fire, of a
   sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^10And that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aaron's and his
   sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by
   fire.

   ^11No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made
   with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any
   offering of the Lord made by fire.

   ^12As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the
   Lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

   ^13And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt;
   neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be
   lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt
   offer salt.

   ^14And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the Lord,
   thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of
   corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.

   ^15And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is
   a meat offering.

   ^16And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten
   corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense
   thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it of
   the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it without
   blemish before the Lord.

   ^2And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it
   at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons the
   priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

   ^3And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering
   made by fire unto the Lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all
   the fat that is upon the inwards,

   ^4And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the
   flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
   take away.

   ^5And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice,
   which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an offering made by
   fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^6And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the Lord
   be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.

   ^7If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before
   the Lord.

   ^8And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it
   before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons shall
   sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

   ^9And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering
   made by fire unto the Lord; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it
   shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the
   inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,

   ^10And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
   flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
   take away.

   ^11And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of the
   offering made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^12And if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the
   Lord.

   ^13And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before
   the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shall
   sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.

   ^14And he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by
   fire unto the Lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat
   that is upon the inwards,

   ^15And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
   flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
   take away.

   ^16And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the
   offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the Lord'S.

   ^17It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all
   your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin
   through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord
   concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall do against any
   of them:

   ^3If the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the
   people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young
   bullock without blemish unto the Lord for a sin offering.

   ^4And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation before the Lord; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock's
   head, and kill the bullock before the Lord.

   ^5And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock's blood,
   and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation:

   ^6And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the
   blood seven times before the Lord, before the vail of the sanctuary.

   ^7And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the
   altar of sweet incense before the Lord, which is in the tabernacle of
   the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the
   bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^8And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin
   offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is
   upon the inwards,

   ^9And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
   flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
   take away,

   ^10As it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace
   offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of the burnt
   offering.

   ^11And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and
   with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung,

   ^12Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a
   clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood
   with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.

   ^13And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and
   the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done
   somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things
   which should not be done, and are guilty;

   ^14When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the
   congregation shall offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him
   before the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^15And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the
   head of the bullock before the Lord: and the bullock shall be killed
   before the Lord.

   ^16And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock's blood
   to the tabernacle of the congregation:

   ^17And the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood, and
   sprinkle it seven times before the Lord, even before the vail.

   ^18And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar which
   is before the Lord, that is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and
   shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of the burnt
   offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^19And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar.

   ^20And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
   sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an
   atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.

   ^21And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him
   as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the
   congregation.

   ^22When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
   against any of the commandments of the Lord his God concerning things
   which should not be done, and is guilty;

   ^23Or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he
   shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish:

   ^24And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in
   the place where they kill the burnt offering before the Lord: it is a
   sin offering.

   ^25And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his
   finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and
   shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt offering.

   ^26And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the
   sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement
   for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^27And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he
   doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning
   things which ought not to be done, and be guilty;

   ^28Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he
   shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish,
   for his sin which he hath sinned.

   ^29And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
   slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.

   ^30And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and
   put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour
   out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.

   ^31And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away
   from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn it
   upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the Lord; and the priest shall
   make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^32And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a
   female without blemish.

   ^33And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
   slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt
   offering.

   ^34And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his
   finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and
   shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:

   ^35And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb
   is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest
   shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made by fire
   unto the Lord: and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin that
   he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness,
   whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it, then he
   shall bear his iniquity.

   ^2Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of an
   unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of
   unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall be
   unclean, and guilty.

   ^3Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it be
   that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he
   knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.

   ^4Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do
   good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it
   be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one
   of these.

   ^5And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that
   he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing:

   ^6And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord for his sin
   which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the
   goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
   him concerning his sin.

   ^7And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his
   trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young
   pigeons, unto the Lord; one for a sin offering, and the other for a
   burnt offering.

   ^8And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which
   is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his neck,
   but shall not divide it asunder:

   ^9And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side
   of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the
   bottom of the altar: it is a sin offering.

   ^10And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the
   manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin
   which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^11But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young
   pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth
   part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil
   upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a sin
   offering.

   ^12Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his
   handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar,
   according to the offerings made by fire unto the Lord: it is a sin
   offering.

   ^13And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin
   that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and
   the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.

   ^14And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^15If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy
   things of the Lord; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the Lord
   a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels
   of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering:

   ^16And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy
   thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the
   priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of
   the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^17And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are
   forbidden to be done by the commandments of the Lord; though he wist it
   not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.

   ^18And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy
   estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest
   shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he
   erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^19It is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto
   his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep, or in
   fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his
   neighbour;

   ^3Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and
   sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning
   therein:

   ^4Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he
   shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he
   hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or
   the lost thing which he found,

   ^5Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore
   it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and
   give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass
   offering.

   ^6And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, a ram without
   blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering,
   unto the priest:

   ^7And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord: and
   it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that he hath done in
   trespassing therein.

   ^8And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^9Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt
   offering: It is the burnt offering, because of the burning upon the
   altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be
   burning in it.

   ^10And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen
   breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the
   fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall
   put them beside the altar.

   ^11And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and
   carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.

   ^12And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be
   put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay
   the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the fat
   of the peace offerings.

   ^13The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go
   out.

   ^14And this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall
   offer it before the Lord, before the altar.

   ^15And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat
   offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is
   upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet
   savour, even the memorial of it, unto the Lord.

   ^16And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with
   unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of
   the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

   ^17It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for
   their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
   sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

   ^18All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It shall
   be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the offerings of
   the Lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy.

   ^19And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^20This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall
   offer unto the Lord in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of
   an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the
   morning, and half thereof at night.

   ^21In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou shalt
   bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer
   for a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^22And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer
   it: it is a statute for ever unto the Lord; it shall be wholly burnt.

   ^23For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it
   shall not be eaten.

   ^24And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^25Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin
   offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin
   offering be killed before the Lord: it is most holy.

   ^26The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place
   shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^27Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
   there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt
   wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place.

   ^28But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if
   it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in
   water.

   ^29All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most holy.

   ^30And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the
   tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place,
   shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most holy.

   ^2In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the
   trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about
   upon the altar.

   ^3And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat
   that covereth the inwards,

   ^4And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the
   flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with the kidneys, it
   shall he take away:

   ^5And the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by
   fire unto the Lord: it is a trespass offering.

   ^6Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in
   the holy place: it is most holy.

   ^7As the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one law
   for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have it.

   ^8And the priest that offereth any man's burnt offering, even the
   priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he
   hath offered.

   ^9And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is
   dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's that
   offereth it.

   ^10And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the
   sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.

   ^11And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
   shall offer unto the Lord.

   ^12If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the
   sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and
   unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of
   fine flour, fried.

   ^13Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread
   with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.

   ^14And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an heave
   offering unto the Lord, and it shall be the priest's that sprinkleth
   the blood of the peace offerings.

   ^15And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for
   thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall
   not leave any of it until the morning.

   ^16But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary
   offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his
   sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten:

   ^17But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day
   shall be burnt with fire.

   ^18And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be
   eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall
   it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an abomination,
   and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.

   ^19And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it
   shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall
   eat thereof.

   ^20But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
   offerings, that pertain unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him,
   even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

   ^21Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the
   uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean
   thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which
   pertain unto the Lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

   ^22And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^23Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of
   fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat.

   ^24And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that
   which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shall
   in no wise eat of it.

   ^25For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
   offering made by fire unto the Lord, even the soul that eateth it shall
   be cut off from his people.

   ^26Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl or
   of beast, in any of your dwellings.

   ^27Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that
   soul shall be cut off from his people.

   ^28And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^29Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the
   sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the Lord shall bring his oblation
   unto the Lord of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.

   ^30His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire,
   the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
   waved for a wave offering before the Lord.

   ^31And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
   shall be Aaron's and his sons'.

   ^32And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave
   offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.

   ^33He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace
   offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.

   ^34For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the
   children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings,
   and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a
   statute for ever from among the children of Israel.

   ^35This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing
   of his sons, out of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, in the day
   when he presented them to minister unto the Lord in the priest's
   office;

   ^36Which the Lord commanded to be given them of the children of Israel,
   in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for ever throughout
   their generations.

   ^37This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and of
   the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
   consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings;

   ^38Which the Lord commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he
   commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the
   Lord, in the wilderness of Sinai.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing
   oil, and a bullock for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of
   unleavened bread;

   ^3And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^4And Moses did as the Lord commanded him; and the assembly was
   gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^5And Moses said unto the congregation, This is the thing which the
   Lord commanded to be done.

   ^6And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.

   ^7And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and
   clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
   him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him
   therewith.

   ^8And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate
   the Urim and the Thummim.

   ^9And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon
   his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the Lord
   commanded Moses.

   ^10And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and
   all that was therein, and sanctified them.

   ^11And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
   the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify
   them.

   ^12And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed
   him, to sanctify him.

   ^13And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and girded
   them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the Lord commanded
   Moses.

   ^14And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and his
   sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin
   offering.

   ^15And he slew it; and Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns
   of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and
   poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make
   reconciliation upon it.

   ^16And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul
   above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned
   it upon the altar.

   ^17But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt
   with fire without the camp; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^18And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his
   sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

   ^19And he killed it; and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round
   about.

   ^20And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the
   pieces, and the fat.

   ^21And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the
   whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour,
   and an offering made by fire unto the Lord; as the Lord commanded
   Moses.

   ^22And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and
   his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

   ^23And he slew it; and Moses took of the blood of it, and put it upon
   the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and
   upon the great toe of his right foot.

   ^24And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip
   of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon
   the great toes of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled the blood upon
   the altar round about.

   ^25And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon the
   inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their
   fat, and the right shoulder:

   ^26And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the Lord,
   he took one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer,
   and put them on the fat, and upon the right shoulder:

   ^27And he put all upon Aaron's hands, and upon his sons' hands, and
   waved them for a wave offering before the Lord.

   ^28And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
   altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet
   savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^29And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering before
   the Lord: for of the ram of consecration it was Moses' part; as the
   Lord commanded Moses.

   ^30And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon
   the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon
   his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and sanctified Aaron,
   and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.

   ^31And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the
   door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the
   bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying,
   Aaron and his sons shall eat it.

   ^32And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn
   with fire.

   ^33And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at
   an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

   ^34As he hath done this day, so the Lord hath commanded to do, to make
   an atonement for you.

   ^35Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord,
   that ye die not: for so I am commanded.

   ^36So Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the
   hand of Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his
   sons, and the elders of Israel;

   ^2And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering,
   and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer them before
   the Lord.

   ^3And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye a
   kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the
   first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering;

   ^4Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the
   Lord; and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the Lord will
   appear unto you.

   ^5And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tabernacle of
   the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood before
   the Lord.

   ^6And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commanded that ye
   should do: and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you.

   ^7And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin
   offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself,
   and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an
   atonement for them; as the Lord commanded.

   ^8Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
   offering, which was for himself.

   ^9And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped his
   finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured
   out the blood at the bottom of the altar:

   ^10But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the
   sin offering, he burnt upon the altar; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^11And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

   ^12And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron's sons presented unto him
   the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.

   ^13And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces
   thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

   ^14And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the
   burnt offering on the altar.

   ^15And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat, which was
   the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin,
   as the first.

   ^16And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to the
   manner.

   ^17And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof, and
   burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.

   ^18He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace
   offerings, which was for the people: and Aaron's sons presented unto
   him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about,

   ^19And the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
   covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:

   ^20And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the
   altar:

   ^21And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave
   offering before the Lord; as Moses commanded.

   ^22And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them,
   and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt
   offering, and peace offerings.

   ^23And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation,
   and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the Lord
   appeared unto all the people.

   ^24And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon
   the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people
   saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer,
   and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire
   before the Lord, which he commanded them not.

   ^2And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they
   died before the Lord.

   ^3Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I
   will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people
   I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.

   ^4And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle
   of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren from
   before the sanctuary out of the camp.

   ^5So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp;
   as Moses had said.

   ^6And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his
   sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
   and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
   whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord hath kindled.

   ^7And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the Lord is upon
   you. And they did according to the word of Moses.

   ^8And the Lord spake unto Aaron, saying,

   ^9Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee,
   when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it
   shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations:

   ^10And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between
   unclean and clean;

   ^11And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which
   the Lord hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.

   ^12And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his
   sons that were left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the
   offerings of the Lord made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside
   the altar: for it is most holy:

   ^13And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it is thy due, and
   thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire: for so I am
   commanded.

   ^14And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
   place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be thy
   due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of peace
   offerings of the children of Israel.

   ^15The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
   offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
   before the Lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
   statute for ever; as the Lord hath commanded.

   ^16And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
   behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the
   sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying,

   ^17Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place,
   seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity
   of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the Lord?

   ^18Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye
   should indeed have eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.

   ^19And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their
   sin offering and their burnt offering before the Lord; and such things
   have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin offering to day, should it
   have been accepted in the sight of the Lord?

   ^20And when Moses heard that, he was content.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which
   ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.

   ^3Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
   cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

   ^4Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of
   them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the cud,
   but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

   ^5And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof;
   he is unclean unto you.

   ^6And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof;
   he is unclean unto you.

   ^7And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet he
   cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.

   ^8Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not
   touch; they are unclean to you.

   ^9These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath
   fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them
   shall ye eat.

   ^10And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the
   rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which
   is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you:

   ^11They shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of
   their flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination.

   ^12Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be an
   abomination unto you.

   ^13And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the
   fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle, and
   the ossifrage, and the ospray,

   ^14And the vulture, and the kite after his kind;

   ^15Every raven after his kind;

   ^16And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
   his kind,

   ^17And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl,

   ^18And the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle,

   ^19And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the
   bat.

   ^20All fowls that creep, going upon all four, shall be an abomination
   unto you.

   ^21Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon
   all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the
   earth;

   ^22Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the
   bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the
   grasshopper after his kind.

   ^23But all other flying creeping things, which have four feet, shall be
   an abomination unto you.

   ^24And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of
   them shall be unclean until the even.

   ^25And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash his
   clothes, and be unclean until the even.

   ^26The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not
   clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one that
   toucheth them shall be unclean.

   ^27And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that
   go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their
   carcase shall be unclean until the even.

   ^28And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and
   be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.

   ^29These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that
   creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after
   his kind,

   ^30And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail,
   and the mole.

   ^31These are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth touch
   them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.

   ^32And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it
   shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or
   skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it
   must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it
   shall be cleansed.

   ^33And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth, whatsoever
   is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.

   ^34Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh
   shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel
   shall be unclean.

   ^35And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth shall be
   unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall be broken
   down: for they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto you.

   ^36Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of water,
   shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be unclean.

   ^37And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which is
   to be sown, it shall be clean.

   ^38But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their carcase
   fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.

   ^39And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the
   carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.

   ^40And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and
   be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it shall
   wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

   ^41And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be an
   abomination; it shall not be eaten.

   ^42Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all four,
   or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that creep upon
   the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an abomination.

   ^43Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that
   creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye
   should be defiled thereby.

   ^44For I am the Lord your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves,
   and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye defile yourselves
   with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

   ^45For I am the Lord that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to
   be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.

   ^46This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living
   creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that creepeth
   upon the earth:

   ^47To make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between
   the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived
   seed, and born a man child: then she shall be unclean seven days;
   according to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be
   unclean.

   ^3And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.

   ^4And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three and
   thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
   sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.

   ^5But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as
   in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying
   threescore and six days.

   ^6And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a
   daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
   offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering, unto
   the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:

   ^7Who shall offer it before the Lord, and make an atonement for her;
   and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is the law
   for her that hath born a male or a female.

   ^8And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
   turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
   other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
   her, and she shall be clean.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,

   ^2When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or
   bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of
   leprosy; then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of
   his sons the priests:

   ^3And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and
   when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the plague in sight be
   deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague of leprosy: and the
   priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.

   ^4If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in sight be
   not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white;
   then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven days:

   ^5And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and, behold, if the
   plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread not in the
   skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:

   ^6And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and, behold,
   if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in the skin,
   the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and he shall
   wash his clothes, and be clean.

   ^7But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath
   been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of the
   priest again:

   ^8And if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin,
   then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.

   ^9When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto
   the priest;

   ^10And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the rising be white in
   the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw
   flesh in the rising;

   ^11It is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall
   pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.

   ^12And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover
   all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his
   foot, wheresoever the priest looketh;

   ^13Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have
   covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that hath the
   plague: it is all turned white: he is clean.

   ^14But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.

   ^15And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be
   unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.

   ^16Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shall
   come unto the priest;

   ^17And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the plague be turned
   into white; then the priest shall pronounce him clean that hath the
   plague: he is clean.

   ^18The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil, and
   is healed,

   ^19And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright
   spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be shewed to the priest;

   ^20And if, when the priest seeth it, behold, it be in sight lower than
   the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white; the priest shall
   pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy broken out of the
   boil.

   ^21But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs
   therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat dark;
   then the priest shall shut him up seven days:

   ^22And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall
   pronounce him unclean: it is a plague.

   ^23But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is a
   burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

   ^24Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot
   burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot,
   somewhat reddish, or white;

   ^25Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the hair in the
   bright spot be turned white, and it be in sight deeper than the skin;
   it is a leprosy broken out of the burning: wherefore the priest shall
   pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.

   ^26But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hair in
   the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but be
   somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:

   ^27And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be
   spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
   unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.

   ^28And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the
   skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the
   priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the
   burning.

   ^29If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;

   ^30Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in sight
   deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair; then the
   priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a leprosy
   upon the head or beard.

   ^31And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, it
   be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black hair
   in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of the
   scall seven days:

   ^32And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague: and,
   behold, if the scall spread not, and there be in it no yellow hair, and
   the scall be not in sight deeper than the skin;

   ^33He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest
   shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:

   ^34And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and,
   behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper
   than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall
   wash his clothes, and be clean.

   ^35But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;

   ^36Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be
   spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is
   unclean.

   ^37But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is black
   hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the priest
   shall pronounce him clean.

   ^38If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright
   spots, even white bright spots;

   ^39Then the priest shall look: and, behold, if the bright spots in the
   skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that
   groweth in the skin; he is clean.

   ^40And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet is he
   clean.

   ^41And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head
   toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.

   ^42And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reddish
   sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead.

   ^43Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising of
   the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as
   the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh;

   ^44He is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him
   utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.

   ^45And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and
   his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
   shall cry, Unclean, unclean.

   ^46All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be defiled;
   he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his
   habitation be.

   ^47The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be a
   woollen garment, or a linen garment;

   ^48Whether it be in the warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether
   in a skin, or in any thing made of skin;

   ^49And if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the
   skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it
   is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto the priest:

   ^50And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up it that hath
   the plague seven days:

   ^51And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be
   spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a
   skin, or in any work that is made of skin; the plague is a fretting
   leprosy; it is unclean.

   ^52He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in
   woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for
   it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.

   ^53And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread
   in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of
   skin;

   ^54Then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein the
   plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:

   ^55And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is washed:
   and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and the plague
   be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it is
   fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.

   ^56And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark
   after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or
   out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof:

   ^57And if it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the
   woof, or in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt
   burn that wherein the plague is with fire.

   ^58And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin
   it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then
   it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.

   ^59This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or
   linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to pronounce
   it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He
   shall be brought unto the priest:

   ^3And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall
   look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper;

   ^4Then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed
   two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:

   ^5And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an
   earthen vessel over running water:

   ^6As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the
   scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the
   blood of the bird that was killed over the running water:

   ^7And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the
   leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the
   living bird loose into the open field.

   ^8And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off
   all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and
   after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of
   his tent seven days.

   ^9But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair
   off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall
   shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh
   in water, and he shall be clean.

   ^10And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish,
   and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three tenth
   deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and one log
   of oil.

   ^11And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that is
   to be made clean, and those things, before the Lord, at the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation:

   ^12And the priest shall take one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass
   offering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave offering before
   the Lord:

   ^13And he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin
   offering and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin
   offering is the priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy:

   ^14And the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
   offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of
   him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and
   upon the great toe of his right foot:

   ^15And the priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour it into
   the palm of his own left hand:

   ^16And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his
   left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times
   before the Lord:

   ^17And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put
   upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon
   the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot,
   upon the blood of the trespass offering:

   ^18And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall
   pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall
   make an atonement for him before the Lord.

   ^19And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an atonement
   for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and afterward he
   shall kill the burnt offering:

   ^20And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat offering
   upon the altar: and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and he
   shall be clean.

   ^21And if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one
   lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for him,
   and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering,
   and a log of oil;

   ^22And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to
   get; and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt
   offering.

   ^23And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the
   priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the
   Lord.

   ^24And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the
   log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before
   the Lord:

   ^25And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest
   shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and put it upon
   the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the
   thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:

   ^26And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left
   hand:

   ^27And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil
   that is in his left hand seven times before the Lord:

   ^28And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip
   of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of
   his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the
   place of the blood of the trespass offering:

   ^29And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put
   upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for
   him before the Lord.

   ^30And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
   pigeons, such as he can get;

   ^31Even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin offering, and the
   other for a burnt offering, with the meat offering: and the priest
   shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the Lord.

   ^32This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose hand
   is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.

   ^33And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^34When ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a
   possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
   your possession;

   ^35And he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying,
   It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague in the house:

   ^36Then the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the
   priest go into it to see the plague, that all that is in the house be
   not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go in to see the
   house:

   ^37And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, if the plague be in
   the walls of the house with hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which
   in sight are lower than the wall;

   ^38Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house,
   and shut up the house seven days:

   ^39And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look:
   and, behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house;

   ^40Then the priest shall command that they take away the stones in
   which the plague is, and they shall cast them into an unclean place
   without the city:

   ^41And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and
   they shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into
   an unclean place:

   ^42And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those
   stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall plaister the house.

   ^43And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that
   he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and
   after it is plaistered;

   ^44Then the priest shall come and look, and, behold, if the plague be
   spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house: it is
   unclean.

   ^45And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber
   thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry them forth
   out of the city into an unclean place.

   ^46Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut
   up shall be unclean until the even.

   ^47And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that
   eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.

   ^48And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold, the
   plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plaistered:
   then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is
   healed.

   ^49And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wood,
   and scarlet, and hyssop:

   ^50And he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel over
   running water:

   ^51And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet,
   and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and
   in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times:

   ^52And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with
   the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood,
   and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet:

   ^53But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open
   fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shall be clean.

   ^54This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,

   ^55And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house,

   ^56And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot:

   ^57To teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law
   of leprosy.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man
   hath a running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is
   unclean.

   ^3And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run
   with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
   uncleanness.

   ^4Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
   every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

   ^5And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
   himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^6And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the issue
   shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
   until the even.

   ^7And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash
   his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^8And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then he
   shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
   until the even.

   ^9And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall be
   unclean.

   ^10And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean
   until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall wash his
   clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^11And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not rinsed
   his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
   water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^12And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue,
   shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.

   ^13And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he
   shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his
   clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.

   ^14And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two
   young pigeons, and come before the Lord unto the door of the tabernacle
   of the congregation, and give them unto the priest:

   ^15And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
   other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
   him before the Lord for his issue.

   ^16And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall
   wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^17And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of
   copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^18The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation, they
   shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^19And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood,
   she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be
   unclean until the even.

   ^20And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
   unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.

   ^21And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
   himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^22And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash his
   clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^23And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when
   he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.

   ^24And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he
   shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall be
   unclean.

   ^25And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time
   of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all
   the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her
   separation: she shall be unclean.

   ^26Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto
   her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall
   be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation.

   ^27And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash
   his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

   ^28But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to
   herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.

   ^29And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or two
   young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^30And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other
   for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for her
   before the Lord for the issue of her uncleanness.

   ^31Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their
   uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
   my tabernacle that is among them.

   ^32This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
   goeth from him, and is defiled therewith;

   ^33And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an
   issue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him that lieth with her
   that is unclean.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   And the Lord spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron,
   when they offered before the Lord, and died;

   ^2And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he
   come not at all times into the holy place within the vail before the
   mercy seat, which is upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear
   in the cloud upon the mercy seat.

   ^3Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a
   sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

   ^4He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen
   breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and
   with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments;
   therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.

   ^5And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two
   kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.

   ^6And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is for
   himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.

   ^7And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the Lord at
   the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^8And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord,
   and the other lot for the scapegoat.

   ^9And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the Lord'S lot fell, and
   offer him for a sin offering.

   ^10But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be
   presented alive before the Lord, to make an atonement with him, and to
   let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.

   ^11And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is for
   himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his house,
   and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself:

   ^12And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off
   the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten
   small, and bring it within the vail:

   ^13And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the
   cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the
   testimony, that he die not:

   ^14And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with
   his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat
   shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times.

   ^15Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the
   people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as
   he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy
   seat, and before the mercy seat:

   ^16And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the
   uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their
   transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for the tabernacle
   of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their
   uncleanness.

   ^17And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when
   he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out,
   and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for
   all the congregation of Israel.

   ^18And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the Lord, and make
   an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of
   the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round
   about.

   ^19And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven
   times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the
   children of Israel.

   ^20And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the
   tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live
   goat:

   ^21And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat,
   and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and
   all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head
   of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the
   wilderness:

   ^22And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land
   not inhabited: and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness.

   ^23And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and
   shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the
   holy place, and shall leave them there:

   ^24And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on
   his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the
   burnt offering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and
   for the people.

   ^25And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.

   ^26And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his
   clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the
   camp.

   ^27And the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin
   offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy
   place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in
   the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.

   ^28And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh
   in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.

   ^29And this shall be a statute for ever unto you: that in the seventh
   month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and
   do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger
   that sojourneth among you:

   ^30For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to
   cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord.

   ^31It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your
   souls, by a statute for ever.

   ^32And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate
   to minister in the priest's office in his father's stead, shall make
   the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the holy
   garments:

   ^33And he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall
   make an atonement for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the
   altar, and he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all the
   people of the congregation.

   ^34And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an
   atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year.
   And he did as the Lord commanded Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of
   Israel, and say unto them; This is the thing which the Lord hath
   commanded, saying,

   ^3What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox,
   or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp,

   ^4And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, to offer an offering unto the Lord before the tabernacle
   of the Lord; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood;
   and that man shall be cut off from among his people:

   ^5To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices,
   which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto
   the Lord, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the
   priest, and offer them for peace offerings unto the Lord.

   ^6And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord at
   the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a
   sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^7And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom
   they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them
   throughout their generations.

   ^8And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of
   Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a
   burnt offering or sacrifice,

   ^9And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, to offer it unto the Lord; even that man shall be cut off
   from among his people.

   ^10And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the
   strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I
   will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut
   him off from among his people.

   ^11For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to
   you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the
   blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.

   ^12Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall
   eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat
   blood.

   ^13And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the
   strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast
   or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof,
   and cover it with dust.

   ^14For it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life
   thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the
   blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the blood
   thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.

   ^15And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that which
   was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or a
   stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water,
   and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

   ^16But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear his
   iniquity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the Lord
   your God.

   ^3After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not
   do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you,
   shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

   ^4Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein:
   I am the Lord your God.

   ^5Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man
   do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord.

   ^6None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
   uncover their nakedness: I am the Lord.

   ^7The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt
   thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her
   nakedness.

   ^8The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy
   father's nakedness.

   ^9The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter
   of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their
   nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

   ^10The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter,
   even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is thine own
   nakedness.

   ^11The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy
   father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

   ^12Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she is
   thy father's near kinswoman.

   ^13Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister: for she
   is thy mother's near kinswoman.

   ^14Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, thou
   shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.

   ^15Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she is
   thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

   ^16Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it is
   thy brother's nakedness.

   ^17Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter,
   neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter,
   to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near kinswomen: it is
   wickedness.

   ^18Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover
   her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.

   ^19Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness,
   as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

   ^20Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife, to
   defile thyself with her.

   ^21And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
   Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

   ^22Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
   abomination.

   ^23Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith:
   neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it is
   confusion.

   ^24Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these
   the nations are defiled which I cast out before you:

   ^25And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof
   upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.

   ^26Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not
   commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor
   any stranger that sojourneth among you:

   ^27(For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which
   were before you, and the land is defiled;)

   ^28That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued
   out the nations that were before you.

   ^29For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls
   that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

   ^30Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one
   of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that
   ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the Lord your God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say
   unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord your God am holy.

   ^3Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
   sabbaths: I am the Lord your God.

   ^4Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the
   Lord your God.

   ^5And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord, ye
   shall offer it at your own will.

   ^6It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if
   ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the fire.

   ^7And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it
   shall not be accepted.

   ^8Therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because
   he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the Lord: and that soul shall be
   cut off from among his people.

   ^9And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap
   the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of
   thy harvest.

   ^10And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather
   every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and
   stranger: I am the Lord your God.

   ^11Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
   another.

   ^12And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou
   profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.

   ^13Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of
   him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
   morning.

   ^14Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the
   blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord.

   ^15Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect
   the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in
   righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.

   ^16Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people:
   neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the
   Lord.

   ^17Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any
   wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

   ^18Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of
   thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the
   Lord.

   ^19Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with
   a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither
   shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.

   ^20And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid,
   betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given
   her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because she
   was not free.

   ^21And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, unto the
   door of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass
   offering.

   ^22And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the
   trespass offering before the Lord for his sin which he hath done: and
   the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.

   ^23And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all
   manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as
   uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it
   shall not be eaten of.

   ^24But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise
   the Lord withal.

   ^25And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may
   yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the Lord your God.

   ^26Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use
   enchantment, nor observe times.

   ^27Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar
   the corners of thy beard.

   ^28Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print
   any marks upon you: I am the Lord.

   ^29Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the
   land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.

   ^30Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the
   Lord.

   ^31Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
   wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord your God.

   ^32Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the
   old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord.

   ^33And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex
   him.

   ^34But the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one
   born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
   strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.

   ^35Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight,
   or in measure.

   ^36Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye
   have: I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of
   Egypt.

   ^37Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments,
   and do them: I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of
   the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel,
   that giveth any of his seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to
   death: the people of the land shall stone him with stones.

   ^3And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from
   among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to
   defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.

   ^4And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the
   man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not:

   ^5Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and
   will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
   whoredom with Molech, from among their people.

   ^6And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and
   after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face
   against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

   ^7Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the Lord your
   God.

   ^8And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I am the Lord which
   sanctify you.

   ^9For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely
   put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall
   be upon him.

   ^10And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even
   he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer
   and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

   ^11And the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his
   father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their
   blood shall be upon them.

   ^12And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely
   be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall be upon
   them.

   ^13If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of
   them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death;
   their blood shall be upon them.

   ^14And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they
   shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness
   among you.

   ^15And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and
   ye shall slay the beast.

   ^16And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou
   shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death;
   their blood shall be upon them.

   ^17And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his
   mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it
   is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of their
   people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his
   iniquity.

   ^18And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall
   uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath
   uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be cut off
   from among their people.

   ^19And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor
   of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear
   their iniquity.

   ^20And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered his
   uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.

   ^21And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing:
   he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.

   ^22Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and
   do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue you
   not out.

   ^23And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast out
   before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore I
   abhorred them.

   ^24But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will
   give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and
   honey: I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other
   people.

   ^25Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean,
   and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make your souls
   abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that
   creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean.

   ^26And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord am holy, and have
   severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

   ^27A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
   wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with
   stones: their blood shall be upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron,
   and say unto them, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his
   people:

   ^2But for his kin, that is near unto him, that is, for his mother, and
   for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his
   brother,

   ^3And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no
   husband; for her may he be defiled.

   ^4But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people,
   to profane himself.

   ^5They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they
   shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their
   flesh.

   ^6They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their
   God: for the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and the bread of their
   God, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.

   ^7They shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither shall
   they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto his
   God.

   ^8Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy
   God: he shall be holy unto thee: for I the Lord, which sanctify you, am
   holy.

   ^9And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the
   whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.

   ^10And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head
   the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the
   garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes;

   ^11Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his
   father, or for his mother;

   ^12Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary
   of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him:
   I am the Lord.

   ^13And he shall take a wife in her virginity.

   ^14A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shall
   he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.

   ^15Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the Lord
   do sanctify him.

   ^16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^17Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he be of thy seed in their
   generations that hath any blemish, let him not approach to offer the
   bread of his God.

   ^18For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not approach:
   a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing
   superfluous,

   ^19Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,

   ^20Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be
   scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;

   ^21No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall
   come nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire: he hath a
   blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.

   ^22He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the
   holy.

   ^23Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar,
   because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I
   the Lord do sanctify them.

   ^24And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
   children of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from
   the holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my
   holy name in those things which they hallow unto me: I am the Lord.

   ^3Say unto them, Whosoever he be of all your seed among your
   generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of
   Israel hallow unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul
   shall be cut off from my presence: I am the Lord.

   ^4What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running
   issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And
   whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose
   seed goeth from him;

   ^5Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made
   unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever
   uncleanness he hath;

   ^6The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even, and
   shall not eat of the holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.

   ^7And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat
   of the holy things; because it is his food.

   ^8That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not eat
   to defile himself therewith: I am the Lord.

   ^9They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it,
   and die therefore, if they profane it: I the Lord do sanctify them.

   ^10There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of the
   priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.

   ^11But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of it,
   and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.

   ^12If the priest's daughter also be married unto a stranger, she may
   not eat of an offering of the holy things.

   ^13But if the priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no
   child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth, she
   shall eat of her father's meat: but there shall no stranger eat
   thereof.

   ^14And if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put
   the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest with
   the holy thing.

   ^15And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
   Israel, which they offer unto the Lord;

   ^16Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their
   holy things: for I the Lord do sanctify them.

   ^17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^18Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of
   Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or
   of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his oblation for all his
   vows, and for all his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto
   the Lord for a burnt offering;

   ^19Ye shall offer at your own will a male without blemish, of the
   beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

   ^20But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it shall
   not be acceptable for you.

   ^21And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord
   to accomplish his vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it
   shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.

   ^22Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed,
   ye shall not offer these unto the Lord, nor make an offering by fire of
   them upon the altar unto the Lord.

   ^23Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or
   lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering;
   but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

   ^24Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which is bruised, or crushed,
   or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof in your
   land.

   ^25Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your God
   of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be
   in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

   ^26And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^27When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it
   shall be seven days under the dam; and from the eighth day and
   thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the
   Lord.

   ^28And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her young
   both in one day.

   ^29And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord,
   offer it at your own will.

   ^30On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
   until the morrow: I am the Lord.

   ^31Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the Lord.

   ^32Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed among
   the children of Israel: I am the Lord which hallow you,

   ^33That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the
   feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations,
   even these are my feasts.

   ^3Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath of
   rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
   sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.

   ^4These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations, which ye
   shall proclaim in their seasons.

   ^5In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the Lord'S
   passover.

   ^6And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened
   bread unto the Lord: seven days ye must eat unleavened bread.

   ^7In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no
   servile work therein.

   ^8But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven days:
   in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work
   therein.

   ^9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^10Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be
   come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest
   thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest
   unto the priest:

   ^11And he shall wave the sheaf before the Lord, to be accepted for you:
   on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.

   ^12And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
   without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the Lord.

   ^13And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine flour
   mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the Lord for a sweet
   savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth
   part of an hin.

   ^14And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears,
   until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto your God:
   it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your
   dwellings.

   ^15And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath, from
   the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven sabbaths
   shall be complete:

   ^16Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty
   days; and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the Lord.

   ^17Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth
   deals: they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with leaven;
   they are the firstfruits unto the Lord.

   ^18And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the
   first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for a
   burnt offering unto the Lord, with their meat offering, and their drink
   offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto the
   Lord.

   ^19Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering, and
   two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.

   ^20And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits for
   a wave offering before the Lord, with the two lambs: they shall be holy
   to the Lord for the priest.

   ^21And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy
   convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it shall be
   a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.

   ^22And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean
   riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt
   thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them unto the
   poor, and to the stranger: I am the Lord your God.

   ^23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^24Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in
   the first day of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of
   blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation.

   ^25Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an offering
   made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^26And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^27Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day of
   atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall
   afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^28And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
   atonement, to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God.

   ^29For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same
   day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

   ^30And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day, the
   same soul will I destroy from among his people.

   ^31Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
   throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

   ^32It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your
   souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even,
   shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

   ^33And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^34Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this
   seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the
   Lord.

   ^35On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no
   servile work therein.

   ^36Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: on
   the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall
   offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: it is a solemn assembly;
   and ye shall do no servile work therein.

   ^37These are the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy
   convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord, a burnt
   offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, every
   thing upon his day:

   ^38Beside the sabbaths of the Lord, and beside your gifts, and beside
   all your vows, and beside all your freewill offerings, which ye give
   unto the Lord.

   ^39Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
   gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord
   seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
   shall be a sabbath.

   ^40And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees,
   branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of
   the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days.

   ^41And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the year.
   It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
   it in the seventh month.

   ^42Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites born
   shall dwell in booths:

   ^43That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to
   dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the
   Lord your God.

   ^44And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil
   olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

   ^3Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
   congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
   before the Lord continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
   generations.

   ^4He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the Lord
   continually.

   ^5And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two
   tenth deals shall be in one cake.

   ^6And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
   table before the Lord.

   ^7And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on
   the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^8Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the Lord continually,
   being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.

   ^9And it shall be Aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in the
   holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord
   made by fire by a perpetual statute.

   ^10And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian,
   went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish
   woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp;

   ^11And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord, and
   cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name was
   Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:)

   ^12And they put him in ward, that the mind of the Lord might be shewed
   them.

   ^13And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^14Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that
   heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation
   stone him.

   ^15And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever
   curseth his God shall bear his sin.

   ^16And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put
   to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well
   the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the
   name of the Lord, shall be put to death.

   ^17And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.

   ^18And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

   ^19And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so
   shall it be done to him;

   ^20Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a
   blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again.

   ^21And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
   killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

   ^22Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for
   one of your own country: for I am the Lord your God.

   ^23And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring
   forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones.
   And the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   And the Lord spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come
   into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto
   the Lord.

   ^3Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune
   thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof;

   ^4But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a
   sabbath for the Lord: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy
   vineyard.

   ^5That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not
   reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a year
   of rest unto the land.

   ^6And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and for
   thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy
   stranger that sojourneth with thee,

   ^7And for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall all
   the increase thereof be meat.

   ^8And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times
   seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto
   thee forty and nine years.

   ^9Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth
   day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the
   trumpet sound throughout all your land.

   ^10And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
   throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a
   jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and
   ye shall return every man unto his family.

   ^11A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow,
   neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes
   in it of thy vine undressed.

   ^12For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the
   increase thereof out of the field.

   ^13In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his
   possession.

   ^14And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy
   neighbour's hand, ye shall not oppress one another:

   ^15According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of
   thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he
   shall sell unto thee:

   ^16According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price
   thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the
   price of it: for according to the number of the years of the fruits
   doth he sell unto thee.

   ^17Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy
   God: for I am the Lord your God.

   ^18Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
   them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

   ^19And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and
   dwell therein in safety.

   ^20And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we
   shall not sow, nor gather in our increase:

   ^21Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it
   shall bring forth fruit for three years.

   ^22And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until the
   ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old store.

   ^23The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine; for ye
   are strangers and sojourners with me.

   ^24And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption
   for the land.

   ^25If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his
   possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he
   redeem that which his brother sold.

   ^26And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem
   it;

   ^27Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the
   overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his
   possession.

   ^28But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold
   shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of
   jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return unto his
   possession.

   ^29And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may
   redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may
   he redeem it.

   ^30And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the
   house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to him
   that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the
   jubile.

   ^31But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them
   shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redeemed,
   and they shall go out in the jubile.

   ^32Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the
   cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time.

   ^33And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold,
   and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of jubile: for
   the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the
   children of Israel.

   ^34But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it
   is their perpetual possession.

   ^35And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
   then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
   sojourner; that he may live with thee.

   ^36Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy
   brother may live with thee.

   ^37Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
   victuals for increase.

   ^38I am the Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of
   Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.

   ^39And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold
   unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:

   ^40But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee,
   and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile:

   ^41And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with
   him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of
   his fathers shall he return.

   ^42For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of
   Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

   ^43Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God.

   ^44Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shall be
   of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen
   and bondmaids.

   ^45Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you,
   of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which
   they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

   ^46And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after
   you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for
   ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule
   one over another with rigour.

   ^47And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother
   that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or
   sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family:

   ^48After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren
   may redeem him:

   ^49Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him, or any that is
   nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or if he be able, he
   may redeem himself.

   ^50And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he
   was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale
   shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of
   an hired servant shall it be with him.

   ^51If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall give
   again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought
   for.

   ^52And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he
   shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give him
   again the price of his redemption.

   ^53And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the other
   shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.

   ^54And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out in
   the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.

   ^55For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my
   servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord
   your God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a
   standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
   land, to bow down unto it: for I am the Lord your God.

   ^2Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord.

   ^3If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;

   ^4Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her
   increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

   ^5And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage
   shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the
   full, and dwell in your land safely.

   ^6And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none
   shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land,
   neither shall the sword go through your land.

   ^7And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by
   the sword.

   ^8And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall
   put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by
   the sword.

   ^9For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply
   you, and establish my covenant with you.

   ^10And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the
   new.

   ^11And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor
   you.

   ^12And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my
   people.

   ^13I am the Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of
   Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands
   of your yoke, and made you go upright.

   ^14But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
   commandments;

   ^15And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my
   judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye
   break my covenant:

   ^16I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror,
   consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and
   cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your
   enemies shall eat it.

   ^17And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
   your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall
   flee when none pursueth you.

   ^18And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will
   punish you seven times more for your sins.

   ^19And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your
   heaven as iron, and your earth as brass:

   ^20And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your land shall not
   yield her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their
   fruits.

   ^21And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I
   will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.

   ^22I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your
   children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your
   high ways shall be desolate.

   ^23And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk
   contrary unto me;

   ^24Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet
   seven times for your sins.

   ^25And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of
   my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities, I
   will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into the
   hand of the enemy.

   ^26And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake
   your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by
   weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

   ^27And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary
   unto me;

   ^28Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will
   chastise you seven times for your sins.

   ^29And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
   daughters shall ye eat.

   ^30And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and
   cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall
   abhor you.

   ^31And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto
   desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.

   ^32And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which
   dwell therein shall be astonished at it.

   ^33And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword
   after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste.

   ^34Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth
   desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land
   rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

   ^35As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest
   in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

   ^36And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness
   into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a
   shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a
   sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

   ^37And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword,
   when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your
   enemies.

   ^38And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies
   shall eat you up.

   ^39And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in
   your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall
   they pine away with them.

   ^40If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
   fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and that
   also they have walked contrary unto me;

   ^41And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought
   them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts
   be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity:

   ^42Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant
   with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I
   will remember the land.

   ^43The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths,
   while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept of the
   punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they despised my
   judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

   ^44And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I
   will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them
   utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the Lord their
   God.

   ^45But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors,
   whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the
   heathen, that I might be their God: I am the Lord.

   ^46These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the Lord made
   between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of
   Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man
   shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the Lord by thy
   estimation.

   ^3And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even
   unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of
   silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

   ^4And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.

   ^5And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy
   estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten
   shekels.

   ^6And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy
   estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the
   female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.

   ^7And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male, then
   thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten
   shekels.

   ^8But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present
   himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to
   his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.

   ^9And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord,
   all that any man giveth of such unto the Lord shall be holy.

   ^10He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for
   a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the
   exchange thereof shall be holy.

   ^11And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
   sacrifice unto the Lord, then he shall present the beast before the
   priest:

   ^12And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou
   valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.

   ^13But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part
   thereof unto thy estimation.

   ^14And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the Lord,
   then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the
   priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.

   ^15And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall
   add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall
   be his.

   ^16And if a man shall sanctify unto the Lord some part of a field of
   his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed
   thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of
   silver.

   ^17If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to thy
   estimation it shall stand.

   ^18But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shall
   reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, even unto
   the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy estimation.

   ^19And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then
   he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and
   it shall be assured to him.

   ^20And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to
   another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.

   ^21But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy unto
   the Lord, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the
   priest's.

   ^22And if a man sanctify unto the Lord a field which he hath bought,
   which is not of the fields of his possession;

   ^23Then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation,
   even unto the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in
   that day, as a holy thing unto the Lord.

   ^24In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of whom it
   was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did belong.

   ^25And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
   sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.

   ^26Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the Lord'S
   firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is
   the Lord'S.

   ^27And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it according
   to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it thereto: or if it
   be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.

   ^28Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the
   Lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of
   his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is most
   holy unto the Lord.

   ^29None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; but
   shall surely be put to death.

   ^30And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or
   of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord'S: it is holy unto the Lord.

   ^31And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add
   thereto the fifth part thereof.

   ^32And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of
   whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
   Lord.

   ^33He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
   change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change
   thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

   ^34These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the
   children of Israel in mount Sinai.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Fourth Book of Moses, called

Numbers
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the
   tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
   in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
   saying,

   ^2Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel,
   after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of
   their names, every male by their polls;

   ^3From twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to
   war in Israel: thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.

   ^4And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of
   the house of his fathers.

   ^5And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of the
   tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.

   ^6Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

   ^7Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

   ^8Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

   ^9Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.

   ^10Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Ammihud:
   of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

   ^11Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.

   ^12Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

   ^13Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.

   ^14Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

   ^15Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.

   ^16These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes
   of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.

   ^17And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their
   names:

   ^18And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of
   the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

   ^19As the Lord commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness
   of Sinai.

   ^20And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son, by their
   generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
   according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from
   twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;

   ^21Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were
   forty and six thousand and five hundred.

   ^22Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of
   them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male
   from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
   war;

   ^23Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were
   fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.

   ^24Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families,
   by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names,
   from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
   war;

   ^25Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad, were
   forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.

   ^26Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^27Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were
   threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

   ^28Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^29Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Issachar,
   were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

   ^30Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^31Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were
   fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

   ^32Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by
   their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
   according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward,
   all that were able to go forth to war;

   ^33Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were
   forty thousand and five hundred.

   ^34Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^35Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manasseh,
   were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.

   ^36Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^37Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin,
   were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.

   ^38Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families,
   by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names,
   from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
   war;

   ^39Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan, were
   threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

   ^40Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their
   families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the
   names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth
   to war;

   ^41Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were
   forty and one thousand and five hundred.

   ^42Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after
   their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
   of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
   go forth to war;

   ^43Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali,
   were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

   ^44These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered,
   and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house
   of his fathers.

   ^45So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by
   the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all that
   were able to go forth to war in Israel;

   ^46Even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three
   thousand and five hundred and fifty.

   ^47But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered
   among them.

   ^48For the Lord had spoken unto Moses, saying,

   ^49Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum
   of them among the children of Israel:

   ^50But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony,
   and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that belong to
   it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; and
   they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the
   tabernacle.

   ^51And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it
   down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set
   it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

   ^52And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his
   own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their hosts.

   ^53But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony,
   that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel:
   and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of testimony.

   ^54And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord
   commanded Moses, so did they.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^2Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard,
   with the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle
   of the congregation shall they pitch.

   ^3And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the
   standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and
   Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of Judah.

   ^4And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore
   and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

   ^5And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar:
   and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the children of
   Issachar.

   ^6And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
   four thousand and four hundred.

   ^7Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be
   captain of the children of Zebulun.

   ^8And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
   seven thousand and four hundred.

   ^9All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred thousand
   and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout
   their armies. These shall first set forth.

   ^10On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben
   according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben
   shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.

   ^11And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and
   six thousand and five hundred.

   ^12And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and the
   captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of
   Zurishaddai.

   ^13And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and
   nine thousand and three hundred.

   ^14Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall be
   Eliasaph the son of Reuel.

   ^15And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and
   five thousand and six hundred and fifty.

   ^16All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred
   thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty,
   throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank.

   ^17Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the
   camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall
   they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.

   ^18On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim
   according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim shall
   be Elishama the son of Ammihud.

   ^19And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
   thousand and five hundred.

   ^20And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the
   children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

   ^21And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and
   two thousand and two hundred.

   ^22Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin
   shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.

   ^23And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and
   five thousand and four hundred.

   ^24All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred
   thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies.
   And they shall go forward in the third rank.

   ^25The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by their
   armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son
   of Ammishaddai.

   ^26And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore
   and two thousand and seven hundred.

   ^27And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the
   captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.

   ^28And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and
   one thousand and five hundred.

   ^29Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of
   Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.

   ^30And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and
   three thousand and four hundred.

   ^31All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred
   thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go
   hindmost with their standards.

   ^32These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the
   house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
   throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand and
   five hundred and fifty.

   ^33But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as
   the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^34And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord
   commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
   forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
   their fathers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the
   Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai.

   ^2And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn,
   and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

   ^3These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were
   anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.

   ^4And Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord, when they offered strange
   fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no
   children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in
   the sight of Aaron their father.

   ^5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^6Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the
   priest, that they may minister unto him.

   ^7And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
   congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
   service of the tabernacle.

   ^8And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the
   service of the tabernacle.

   ^9And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are
   wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.

   ^10And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
   their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
   to death.

   ^11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^12And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of
   Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the
   children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine;

   ^13Because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all
   the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn
   in Israel, both man and beast: mine shall they be: I am the Lord.

   ^14And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,

   ^15Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by
   their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou
   number them.

   ^16And Moses numbered them according to the word of the Lord, as he was
   commanded.

   ^17And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath,
   and Merari.

   ^18And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families;
   Libni, and Shimei.

   ^19And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron,
   and Uzziel.

   ^20And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These
   are the families of the Levites according to the house of their
   fathers.

   ^21Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the
   Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites.

   ^22Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the
   males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of
   them were seven thousand and five hundred.

   ^23The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle
   westward.

   ^24And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall be
   Eliasaph the son of Lael.

   ^25And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the
   congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering
   thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation,

   ^26And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the
   court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and
   the cords of it for all the service thereof.

   ^27And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the
   Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the
   Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites.

   ^28In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were
   eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.

   ^29The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the
   tabernacle southward.

   ^30And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the
   Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.

   ^31And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
   candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith
   they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.

   ^32And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the
   chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
   charge of the sanctuary.

   ^33Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the
   Mushites: these are the families of Merari.

   ^34And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all
   the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
   hundred.

   ^35And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari
   was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the
   tabernacle northward.

   ^36And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be the
   boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
   thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
   that serveth thereto,

   ^37And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and
   their pins, and their cords.

   ^38But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
   before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses, and
   Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge
   of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be
   put to death.

   ^39All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron
   numbered at the commandment of the Lord, throughout their families, all
   the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand.

   ^40And the Lord said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males
   of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the
   number of their names.

   ^41And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the Lord) instead of
   all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the
   Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children
   of Israel.

   ^42And Moses numbered, as the Lord commanded him, all the firstborn
   among the children of Israel.

   ^43And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old
   and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two
   thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.

   ^44And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^45Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of
   Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the
   Levites shall be mine: I am the Lord.

   ^46And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
   threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel,
   which are more than the Levites;

   ^47Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll, after the
   shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them: (the shekel is twenty
   gerahs:)

   ^48And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is
   to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.

   ^49And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and above
   them that were redeemed by the Levites:

   ^50Of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money; a
   thousand three hundred and threescore and five shekels, after the
   shekel of the sanctuary:

   ^51And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and
   to his sons, according to the word of the Lord, as the Lord commanded
   Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^2Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after
   their families, by the house of their fathers,

   ^3From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that
   enter into the host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the
   congregation.

   ^4This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of
   the congregation, about the most holy things:

   ^5And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons,
   and they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of
   testimony with it:

   ^6And shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall
   spread over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves
   thereof.

   ^7And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
   and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
   to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon:

   ^8And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the
   same with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves
   thereof.

   ^9And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the
   light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all the
   oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it:

   ^10And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering
   of badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar.

   ^11And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and
   cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put to the staves
   thereof:

   ^12And they shall take all the instruments of ministry, wherewith they
   minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover
   them with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put them on a bar:

   ^13And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a
   purple cloth thereon:

   ^14And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they
   minister about it, even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels,
   and the basons, all the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread
   upon it a covering of badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.

   ^15And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
   sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
   forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but they
   shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are the
   burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^16And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest pertaineth
   the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily meat
   offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the
   tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
   vessels thereof.

   ^17And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^18Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from
   among the Levites:

   ^19But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they
   approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and
   appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:

   ^20But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
   lest they die.

   ^21And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^22Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of
   their fathers, by their families;

   ^23From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou
   number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to do the work
   in the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^24This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve,
   and for burdens:

   ^25And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the
   tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and the covering of the
   badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the hanging for the door of
   the tabernacle of the congregation,

   ^26And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the
   gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round
   about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and
   all that is made for them: so shall they serve.

   ^27At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of
   the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
   service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.

   ^28This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the
   tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the
   hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

   ^29As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their
   families, by the house of their fathers;

   ^30From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt
   thou number them, every one that entereth into the service, to do the
   work of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^31And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their
   service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the
   tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
   thereof,

   ^32And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and
   their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments, and with all
   their service: and by name ye shall reckon the instruments of the
   charge of their burden.

   ^33This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according
   to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the
   hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

   ^34And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the
   sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house of
   their fathers,

   ^35From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every
   one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of
   the congregation:

   ^36And those that were numbered of them by their families were two
   thousand seven hundred and fifty.

   ^37These were they that were numbered of the families of the
   Kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
   congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according to the
   commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

   ^38And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout
   their families, and by the house of their fathers,

   ^39From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every
   one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of
   the congregation,

   ^40Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by
   the house of their fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and
   thirty.

   ^41These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of
   Gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
   congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number according to the
   commandment of the Lord.

   ^42And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari,
   throughout their families, by the house of their fathers,

   ^43From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every
   one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of
   the congregation,

   ^44Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were
   three thousand and two hundred.

   ^45These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
   Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord
   by the hand of Moses.

   ^46All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron
   and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the
   house of their fathers,

   ^47From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every
   one that came to do the service of the ministry, and the service of the
   burden in the tabernacle of the congregation,

   ^48Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five
   hundred and fourscore.

   ^49According to the commandment of the Lord they were numbered by the
   hand of Moses, every one according to his service, and according to his
   burden: thus were they numbered of him, as the Lord commanded Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every
   leper, and every one that hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by
   the dead:

   ^3Both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put
   them; that they defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.

   ^4And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp:
   as the Lord spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.

   ^5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^6Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit
   any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that
   person be guilty;

   ^7Then they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall
   recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the
   fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath
   trespassed.

   ^8But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let
   the trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even to the priest; beside
   the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.

   ^9And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel,
   which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.

   ^10And every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man
   giveth the priest, it shall be his.

   ^11And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^12Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man's
   wife go aside, and commit a trespass against him,

   ^13And a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her
   husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witness
   against her, neither she be taken with the manner;

   ^14And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his
   wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him,
   and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled:

   ^15Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall
   bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal;
   he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is
   an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to
   remembrance.

   ^16And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the Lord:

   ^17And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of
   the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take,
   and put it into the water:

   ^18And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the
   woman's head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which is
   the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his hand the bitter
   water that causeth the curse:

   ^19And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman,
   If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to
   uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from this
   bitter water that causeth the curse:

   ^20But if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, and
   if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thee beside thine
   husband:

   ^21Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and
   the priest shall say unto the woman, The Lord make thee a curse and an
   oath among thy people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and
   thy belly to swell;

   ^22And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to
   make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: And the woman shall say,
   Amen, amen.

   ^23And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot
   them out with the bitter water:

   ^24And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth
   the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her,
   and become bitter.

   ^25Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman's
   hand, and shall wave the offering before the Lord, and offer it upon
   the altar:

   ^26And the priest shall take an handful of the offering, even the
   memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shall cause
   the woman to drink the water.

   ^27And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to
   pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her
   husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her,
   and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot:
   and the woman shall be a curse among her people.

   ^28And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be
   free, and shall conceive seed.

   ^29This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another
   instead of her husband, and is defiled;

   ^30Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous
   over his wife, and shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest
   shall execute upon her all this law.

   ^31Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall
   bear her iniquity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man
   or woman shall separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to
   separate themselves unto the Lord:

   ^3He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink
   no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink
   any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.

   ^4All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of
   the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.

   ^5All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come
   upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth
   himself unto the Lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the locks of the
   hair of his head grow.

   ^6All the days that he separateth himself unto the Lord he shall come
   at no dead body.

   ^7He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother,
   for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the
   consecration of his God is upon his head.

   ^8All the days of his separation he is holy unto the Lord.

   ^9And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head
   of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of his
   cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.

   ^10And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
   pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation:

   ^11And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other
   for a burnt offering, and make an atonement for him, for that he sinned
   by the dead, and shall hallow his head that same day.

   ^12And he shall consecrate unto the Lord the days of his separation,
   and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but
   the days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was
   defiled.

   ^13And this is the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation
   are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle of
   the congregation:

   ^14And he shall offer his offering unto the Lord, one he lamb of the
   first year without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of
   the first year without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without
   blemish for peace offerings,

   ^15And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with
   oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat
   offering, and their drink offerings.

   ^16And the priest shall bring them before the Lord, and shall offer his
   sin offering, and his burnt offering:

   ^17And he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings unto
   the Lord, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer
   also his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^18And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the door
   of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of the
   head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the
   sacrifice of the peace offerings.

   ^19And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one
   unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall
   put them upon the hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his
   separation is shaven:

   ^20And the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the Lord:
   this is holy for the priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder:
   and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.

   ^21This is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his offering
   unto the Lord for his separation, beside that that his hand shall get:
   according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after the law of his
   separation.

   ^22And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^23Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall
   bless the children of Israel, saying unto them,

   ^24The Lord bless thee, and keep thee:

   ^25The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:

   ^26The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

   ^27And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will
   bless them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the
   tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the
   instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and
   had anointed them, and sanctified them;

   ^2That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who
   were the princes of the tribes, and were over them that were numbered,
   offered:

   ^3And they brought their offering before the Lord, six covered wagons,
   and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an
   ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle.

   ^4And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^5Take it of them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle
   of the congregation; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to
   every man according to his service.

   ^6And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the
   Levites.

   ^7Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according
   to their service:

   ^8And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari,
   according unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of
   Aaron the priest.

   ^9But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the
   sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their
   shoulders.

   ^10And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day that
   it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before the
   altar.

   ^11And the Lord said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering, each
   prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.

   ^12And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the son
   of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:

   ^13And his offering was one silver charger, the weight thereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them were full of fine flour
   mingled with oil for a meat offering:

   ^14One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense:

   ^15One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^16One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^17And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nahshon
   the son of Amminadab.

   ^18On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did
   offer:

   ^19He offered for his offering one silver charger, the weight whereof
   was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels,
   after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour
   mingled with oil for a meat offering:

   ^20One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^21One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^22One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^23And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nethaneel
   the son of Zuar.

   ^24On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of
   Zebulun, did offer:

   ^25His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^26One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^27One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^28One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^29And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliab the
   son of Helon.

   ^30On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children
   of Reuben, did offer:

   ^31His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and
   thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of
   the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a
   meat offering:

   ^32One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^33One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^34One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^35And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elizur
   the son of Shedeur.

   ^36On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the
   children of Simeon, did offer:

   ^37His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^38One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^39One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^40One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^41And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel
   the son of Zurishaddai.

   ^42On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children
   of Gad, offered:

   ^43His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and
   thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of
   the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a
   meat offering:

   ^44One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^45One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^46One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^47And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliasaph
   the son of Deuel.

   ^48On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the
   children of Ephraim, offered:

   ^49His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^50One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^51One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^52One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^53And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elishama
   the son of Ammihud.

   ^54On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of
   the children of Manasseh:

   ^55His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and
   thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of
   the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a
   meat offering:

   ^56One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^57One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^58One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^59And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Gamaliel
   the son of Pedahzur.

   ^60On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children
   of Benjamin, offered:

   ^61His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^62One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^63One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^64One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^65And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Abidan
   the son of Gideoni.

   ^66On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the
   children of Dan, offered:

   ^67His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^68One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^69One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^70One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^71And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahiezer
   the son of Ammishaddai.

   ^72On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children
   of Asher, offered:

   ^73His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^74One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^75One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^76One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^77And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Pagiel
   the son of Ocran.

   ^78On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of
   Naphtali, offered:

   ^79His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an
   hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after
   the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled
   with oil for a meat offering:

   ^80One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:

   ^81One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
   offering:

   ^82One kid of the goats for a sin offering:

   ^83And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he
   goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahira the
   son of Enan.

   ^84This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was
   anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve
   silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:

   ^85Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each
   bowl seventy: all the silver vessels weighed two thousand and four
   hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:

   ^86The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten shekels
   apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons
   was an hundred and twenty shekels.

   ^87All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams
   twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat offering:
   and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.

   ^88And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were
   twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs
   of the first year sixty. This was the dedication of the altar, after
   that it was anointed.

   ^89And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to
   speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from
   off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the
   two cherubims: and he spake unto him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the
   seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.

   ^3And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
   candlestick, as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^4And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the shaft
   thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according unto the
   pattern which the Lord had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick.

   ^5And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^6Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.

   ^7And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of
   purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let them
   wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.

   ^8Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even fine
   flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a
   sin offering.

   ^9And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
   congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children
   of Israel together:

   ^10And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord: and the children
   of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites:

   ^11And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of
   the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord.

   ^12And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the
   bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the
   other for a burnt offering, unto the Lord, to make an atonement for the
   Levites.

   ^13And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons,
   and offer them for an offering unto the Lord.

   ^14Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of
   Israel: and the Levites shall be mine.

   ^15And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the
   tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer
   them for an offering.

   ^16For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel;
   instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the firstborn of
   all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me.

   ^17For all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, both man
   and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt
   I sanctified them for myself.

   ^18And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children
   of Israel.

   ^19And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from
   among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of
   Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement
   for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children
   of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.

   ^20And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
   Israel, did to the Levites according unto all that the Lord commanded
   Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.

   ^21And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and
   Aaron offered them as an offering before the Lord; and Aaron made an
   atonement for them to cleanse them.

   ^22And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the
   tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as
   the Lord had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto
   them.

   ^23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^24This is it that belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five
   years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service of the
   tabernacle of the congregation:

   ^25And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the
   service thereof, and shall serve no more:

   ^26But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the
   congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt
   thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first
   month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
   saying,

   ^2Let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his appointed
   season.

   ^3In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his
   appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to
   all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.

   ^4And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep
   the passover.

   ^5And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month
   at even in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that the Lord
   commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.

   ^6And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a
   man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came
   before Moses and before Aaron on that day:

   ^7And those men said unto him, We are defiled by the dead body of a
   man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of
   the Lord in his appointed season among the children of Israel?

   ^8And Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the Lord
   will command concerning you.

   ^9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^10Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of
   your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a
   journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the Lord.

   ^11The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it,
   and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.

   ^12They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone of
   it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it.

   ^13But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth
   to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among
   his people: because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his
   appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.

   ^14And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
   passover unto the Lord; according to the ordinance of the passover, and
   according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one
   ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the
   land.

   ^15And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered
   the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even there
   was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until the
   morning.

   ^16So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of
   fire by night.

   ^17And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that
   the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud
   abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents.

   ^18At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed, and
   at the commandment of the Lord they pitched: as long as the cloud abode
   upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents.

   ^19And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then
   the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord, and journeyed not.

   ^20And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle;
   according to the commandment of the Lord they abode in their tents, and
   according to the commandment of the Lord they journeyed.

   ^21And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and
   that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed:
   whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they
   journeyed.

   ^22Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud
   tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel
   abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they
   journeyed.

   ^23At the commandment of the Lord they rested in the tents, and at the
   commandment of the Lord they journeyed: they kept the charge of the
   Lord, at the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make
   them: that thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and
   for the journeying of the camps.

   ^3And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble
   themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^4And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which are
   heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.

   ^5When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts
   shall go forward.

   ^6When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the
   south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for their
   journeys.

   ^7But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow,
   but ye shall not sound an alarm.

   ^8And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and
   they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your
   generations.

   ^9And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth
   you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be
   remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your
   enemies.

   ^10Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in
   the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over
   your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings;
   that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the Lord
   your God.

   ^11And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in the
   second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle of the
   testimony.

   ^12And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness
   of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.

   ^13And they first took their journey according to the commandment of
   the Lord by the hand of Moses.

   ^14In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of
   Judah according to their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the son
   of Amminadab.

   ^15And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was
   Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

   ^16And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab
   the son of Helon.

   ^17And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the
   sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.

   ^18And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to
   their armies: and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.

   ^19And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was
   Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

   ^20And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph
   the son of Deuel.

   ^21And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the other
   did set up the tabernacle against they came.

   ^22And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward
   according to their armies: and over his host was Elishama the son of
   Ammihud.

   ^23And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was
   Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

   ^24And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was
   Abidan the son of Gideoni.

   ^25And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward,
   which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and
   over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

   ^26And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel
   the son of Ocran.

   ^27And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira
   the son of Enan.

   ^28Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to
   their armies, when they set forward.

   ^29And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses'
   father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said,
   I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for
   the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.

   ^30And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine own
   land, and to my kindred.

   ^31And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest
   how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us
   instead of eyes.

   ^32And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what
   goodness the Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

   ^33And they departed from the mount of the Lord three days' journey:
   and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them in the three
   days' journey, to search out a resting place for them.

   ^34And the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out
   of the camp.

   ^35And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise
   up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate
   thee flee before thee.

   ^36And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands
   of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord: and the Lord
   heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the Lord burnt
   among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the
   camp.

   ^2And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the Lord,
   the fire was quenched.

   ^3And he called the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of the
   Lord burnt among them.

   ^4And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the
   children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh
   to eat?

   ^5We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the
   cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the
   garlick:

   ^6But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing at all, beside this
   manna, before our eyes.

   ^7And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the
   colour of bdellium.

   ^8And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills,
   or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it: and
   the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.

   ^9And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon
   it.

   ^10Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every
   man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the Lord was kindled
   greatly; Moses also was displeased.

   ^11And Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy
   servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou
   layest the burden of all this people upon me?

   ^12Have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou
   shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father
   beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their
   fathers?

   ^13Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they
   weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.

   ^14I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy
   for me.

   ^15And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if
   I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness.

   ^16And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the
   elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and
   officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the
   congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

   ^17And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of
   the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
   shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
   thyself alone.

   ^18And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow,
   and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the Lord,
   saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us in
   Egypt: therefore the Lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

   ^19Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten
   days, nor twenty days;

   ^20But even a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it
   be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the Lord which is
   among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of
   Egypt?

   ^21And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred
   thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they
   may eat a whole month.

   ^22Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them?
   or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to
   suffice them?

   ^23And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lord's hand waxed short? thou
   shalt see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.

   ^24And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the Lord, and
   gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them
   round about the tabernacle.

   ^25And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of
   the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and
   it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
   prophesied, and did not cease.

   ^26But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the one
   was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon
   them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out unto
   the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

   ^27And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad
   do prophesy in the camp.

   ^28And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his young
   men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.

   ^29And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that
   all the Lord'S people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his
   spirit upon them!

   ^30And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.

   ^31And there went forth a wind from the Lord, and brought quails from
   the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's journey on
   this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other side, round
   about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the face of the
   earth.

   ^32And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and all
   the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least
   gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
   round about the camp.

   ^33And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed,
   the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord
   smote the people with a very great plague.

   ^34And he called the name of that place Kibrothhattaavah: because there
   they buried the people that lusted.

   ^35And the people journeyed from Kibrothhattaavah unto Hazeroth; and
   abode at Hazeroth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman
   whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.

   ^2And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not
   spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it.

   ^3(Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon
   the face of the earth.)

   ^4And the Lord spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto
   Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And
   they three came out.

   ^5And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the
   door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came
   forth.

   ^6And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I
   the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
   unto him in a dream.

   ^7My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

   ^8With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
   dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold:
   wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?

   ^9And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them; and he departed.

   ^10And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam
   became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and,
   behold, she was leprous.

   ^11And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not
   the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have
   sinned.

   ^12Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when
   he cometh out of his mother's womb.

   ^13And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, Heal her now, O God, I
   beseech thee.

   ^14And the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her
   face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
   the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

   ^15And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
   journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.

   ^16And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the
   wilderness of Paran.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give
   unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye
   send a man, every one a ruler among them.

   ^3And Moses by the commandment of the Lord sent them from the
   wilderness of Paran: all those men were heads of the children of
   Israel.

   ^4And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son
   of Zaccur.

   ^5Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.

   ^6Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

   ^7Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.

   ^8Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.

   ^9Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.

   ^10Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.

   ^11Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the
   son of Susi.

   ^12Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.

   ^13Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.

   ^14Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.

   ^15Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.

   ^16These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land.
   And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.

   ^17And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto
   them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:

   ^18And see the land, what it is; and the people that dwelleth therein,
   whether they be strong or weak, few or many;

   ^19And what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad;
   and what cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in
   strong holds;

   ^20And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether there be
   wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit
   of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe grapes.

   ^21So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin
   unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.

   ^22And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman,
   Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron was built
   seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)

   ^23And they came unto the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a
   branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a
   staff; and they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

   ^24The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of
   grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.

   ^25And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

   ^26And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the
   congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran,
   to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
   congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

   ^27And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou
   sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
   fruit of it.

   ^28Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the
   cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the children of
   Anak there.

   ^29The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and
   the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
   Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.

   ^30And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at
   once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.

   ^31But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up
   against the people; for they are stronger than we.

   ^32And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
   searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which
   we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
   thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
   stature.

   ^33And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the
   giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in
   their sight.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the
   people wept that night.

   ^2And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against
   Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had
   died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!

   ^3And wherefore hath the Lord brought us unto this land, to fall by the
   sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not
   better for us to return into Egypt?

   ^4And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us
   return into Egypt.

   ^5Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of
   the congregation of the children of Israel.

   ^6And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were
   of them that searched the land, rent their clothes:

   ^7And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel,
   saying, The land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding
   good land.

   ^8If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and
   give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

   ^9Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the
   land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from them,
   and the Lord is with us: fear them not.

   ^10But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory
   of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all
   the children of Israel.

   ^11And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me?
   and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I
   have shewed among them?

   ^12I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will
   make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.

   ^13And Moses said unto the Lord, Then the Egyptians shall hear it, (for
   thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)

   ^14And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they have
   heard that thou Lord art among this people, that thou Lord art seen
   face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that thou
   goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar
   of fire by night.

   ^15Now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the nations
   which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,

   ^16Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land
   which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the
   wilderness.

   ^17And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great,
   according as thou hast spoken, saying,

   ^18The Lord is longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity
   and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the
   iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
   generation.

   ^19Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto
   the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from
   Egypt even until now.

   ^20And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word:

   ^21But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory
   of the Lord.

   ^22Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles,
   which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
   these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice;

   ^23Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers,
   neither shall any of them that provoked me see it:

   ^24But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and
   hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he
   went; and his seed shall possess it.

   ^25(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) To
   morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red
   sea.

   ^26And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^27How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur
   against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel,
   which they murmur against me.

   ^28Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken
   in mine ears, so will I do to you:

   ^29Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were
   numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old
   and upward, which have murmured against me,

   ^30Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I sware
   to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua
   the son of Nun.

   ^31But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I
   bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

   ^32But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness.

   ^33And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and
   bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness.

   ^34After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
   forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
   forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

   ^35I the Lord have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil
   congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this wilderness
   they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

   ^36And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and
   made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
   slander upon the land,

   ^37Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died
   by the plague before the Lord.

   ^38But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
   were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

   ^39And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel: and
   the people mourned greatly.

   ^40And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top
   of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place
   which the Lord hath promised: for we have sinned.

   ^41And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of
   the Lord? but it shall not prosper.

   ^42Go not up, for the Lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten
   before your enemies.

   ^43For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and ye
   shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the Lord,
   therefore the Lord will not be with you.

   ^44But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark
   of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.

   ^45Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in
   that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come
   into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you,

   ^3And will make an offering by fire unto the Lord, a burnt offering, or
   a sacrifice in performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your
   solemn feasts, to make a sweet savour unto the Lord, of the herd, or of
   the flock:

   ^4Then shall he that offereth his offering unto the Lord bring a meat
   offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an
   hin of oil.

   ^5And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt thou
   prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.

   ^6Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth deals
   of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.

   ^7And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an hin of
   wine, for a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^8And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a
   sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the Lord:

   ^9Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth
   deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.

   ^10And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, for
   an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^11Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a
   lamb, or a kid.

   ^12According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to
   every one according to their number.

   ^13All that are born of the country shall do these things after this
   manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
   the Lord.

   ^14And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in
   your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
   savour unto the Lord; as ye do, so he shall do.

   ^15One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also
   for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in
   your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the Lord.

   ^16One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that
   sojourneth with you.

   ^17And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^18Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come
   into the land whither I bring you,

   ^19Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye
   shall offer up an heave offering unto the Lord.

   ^20Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
   offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall
   ye heave it.

   ^21Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the Lord an heave
   offering in your generations.

   ^22And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments, which
   the Lord hath spoken unto Moses,

   ^23Even all that the Lord hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from
   the day that the Lord commanded Moses, and henceforward among your
   generations;

   ^24Then it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the
   knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer
   one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the
   Lord, with his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the
   manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.

   ^25And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of
   the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is
   ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by
   fire unto the Lord, and their sin offering before the Lord, for their
   ignorance:

   ^26And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children of
   Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; seeing all the
   people were in ignorance.

   ^27And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she
   goat of the first year for a sin offering.

   ^28And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth
   ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the Lord, to make an
   atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

   ^29Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance, both
   for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the stranger
   that sojourneth among them.

   ^30But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born in
   the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord; and that soul
   shall be cut off from among his people.

   ^31Because he hath despised the word of the Lord, and hath broken his
   commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be
   upon him.

   ^32And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found
   a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

   ^33And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and
   Aaron, and unto all the congregation.

   ^34And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be
   done to him.

   ^35And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death:
   all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.

   ^36And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned
   him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^37And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^38Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them
   fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations,
   and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:

   ^39And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and
   remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye
   seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to
   go a whoring:

   ^40That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto
   your God.

   ^41I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt,
   to be your God: I am the Lord your God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and
   Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons
   of Reuben, took men:

   ^2And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of
   Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the
   congregation, men of renown:

   ^3And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against
   Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
   congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them:
   wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the
   Lord?

   ^4And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face:

   ^5And he spake unto Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to
   morrow the Lord will shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause
   him to come near unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause
   to come near unto him.

   ^6This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company;

   ^7And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the Lord to
   morrow: and it shall be that the man whom the Lord doth choose, he
   shall be holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

   ^8And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:

   ^9Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath
   separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to
   himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand
   before the congregation to minister unto them?

   ^10And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons
   of Levi with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?

   ^11For which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered together
   against the Lord: and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?

   ^12And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which
   said, We will not come up:

   ^13Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that
   floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou
   make thyself altogether a prince over us?

   ^14Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk
   and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou
   put out the eyes of these men? we will not come up.

   ^15And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou
   their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt
   one of them.

   ^16And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the
   Lord, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow:

   ^17And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye
   before the Lord every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers;
   thou also, and Aaron, each of you his censer.

   ^18And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid
   incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation with Moses and Aaron.

   ^19And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door
   of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the Lord
   appeared unto all the congregation.

   ^20And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^21Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume
   them in a moment.

   ^22And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the
   spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
   all the congregation?

   ^23And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^24Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the
   tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

   ^25And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of
   Israel followed him.

   ^26And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from
   the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
   consumed in all their sins.

   ^27So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on
   every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of
   their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
   children.

   ^28And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to
   do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.

   ^29If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited
   after the visitation of all men; then the Lord hath not sent me.

   ^30But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and
   swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down
   quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
   provoked the Lord.

   ^31And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these
   words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them:

   ^32And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their
   houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their
   goods.

   ^33They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
   pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
   congregation.

   ^34And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them:
   for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also.

   ^35And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two
   hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

   ^36And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^37Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the
   censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they
   are hallowed.

   ^38The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make
   them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered them
   before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a sign
   unto the children of Israel.

   ^39And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they that
   were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a covering
   of the altar:

   ^40To be a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger,
   which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer incense before
   the Lord; that he be not as Korah, and as his company: as the Lord said
   to him by the hand of Moses.

   ^41But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel
   murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the
   people of the Lord.

   ^42And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
   Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
   congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
   Lord appeared.

   ^43And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^44And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^45Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as
   in a moment. And they fell upon their faces.

   ^46And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from
   off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
   congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
   out from the Lord; the plague is begun.

   ^47And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
   congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
   he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

   ^48And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
   stayed.

   ^49Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven
   hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.

   ^50And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of the
   congregation: and the plague was stayed.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a
   rod according to the house of their fathers, of all their princes
   according to the house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every
   man's name upon his rod.

   ^3And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod
   shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

   ^4And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
   before the testimony, where I will meet with you.

   ^5And it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom I shall choose,
   shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the
   children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you.

   ^6And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their
   princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to their
   fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was among their
   rods.

   ^7And Moses laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of
   witness.

   ^8And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the
   tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of
   Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
   yielded almonds.

   ^9And Moses brought out all the rods from before the Lord unto all the
   children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

   ^10And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before the
   testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
   quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

   ^11And Moses did so: as the Lord commanded him, so did he.

   ^12And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die,
   we perish, we all perish.

   ^13Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord
   shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   And the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house
   with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy
   sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

   ^2And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father,
   bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and minister
   unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the
   tabernacle of witness.

   ^3And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle:
   only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary and the
   altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.

   ^4And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the
   tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle:
   and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.

   ^5And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the
   altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of Israel.

   ^6And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the
   children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the Lord, to do
   the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^7Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's office
   for every thing of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve:
   I have given your priest's office unto you as a service of gift: and
   the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

   ^8And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the
   charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the
   children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the
   anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.

   ^9This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire:
   every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and every sin
   offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs, which they
   shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.

   ^10In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it:
   it shall be holy unto thee.

   ^11And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the
   wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto thee,
   and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever:
   every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

   ^12All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the
   wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the Lord,
   them have I given thee.

   ^13And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
   unto the Lord, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house
   shall eat of it.

   ^14Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.

   ^15Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they bring
   unto the Lord, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine:
   nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the
   firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.

   ^16And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou
   redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels,
   after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.

   ^17But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the
   firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt
   sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an
   offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^18And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as the
   right shoulder are thine.

   ^19All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of
   Israel offer unto the Lord, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy
   daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt
   for ever before the Lord unto thee and to thy seed with thee.

   ^20And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in
   their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part
   and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.

   ^21And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in
   Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the
   service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^22Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
   tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

   ^23But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a statute
   for ever throughout your generations, that among the children of Israel
   they have no inheritance.

   ^24But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an
   heave offering unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites to inherit:
   therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they
   shall have no inheritance.

   ^25And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^26Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the
   children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your
   inheritance, then ye shall offer up an heave offering of it for the
   Lord, even a tenth part of the tithe.

   ^27And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though
   it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the
   winepress.

   ^28Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the Lord of all your
   tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall give
   thereof the Lord'S heave offering to Aaron the priest.

   ^29Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the
   Lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of
   it.

   ^30Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best
   thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the
   increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

   ^31And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it
   is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^32And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from
   it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the
   children of Israel, lest ye die.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,

   ^2This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord hath commanded,
   saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red
   heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came
   yoke:

   ^3And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her
   forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:

   ^4And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and
   sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the
   congregation seven times:

   ^5And one shall burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh,
   and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn:

   ^6And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and
   cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.

   ^7Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh
   in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest
   shall be unclean until the even.

   ^8And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe
   his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.

   ^9And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and
   lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for
   the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation:
   it is a purification for sin.

   ^10And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
   clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the
   children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them,
   for a statute for ever.

   ^11He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven
   days.

   ^12He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh
   day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third day, then
   the seventh day he shall not be clean.

   ^13Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and
   purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; and that
   soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was
   not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet
   upon him.

   ^14This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the
   tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

   ^15And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is
   unclean.

   ^16And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open
   fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be
   unclean seven days.

   ^17And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the burnt
   heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put thereto
   in a vessel:

   ^18And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and
   sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the
   persons that were there, and upon him that touched a bone, or one
   slain, or one dead, or a grave:

   ^19And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third
   day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify
   himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be
   clean at even.

   ^20But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself,
   that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he hath
   defiled the sanctuary of the Lord: the water of separation hath not
   been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.

   ^21And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that
   sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that
   toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

   ^22And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the
   soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the
   desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and
   Miriam died there, and was buried there.

   ^2And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
   themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.

   ^3And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we
   had died when our brethren died before the Lord!

   ^4And why have ye brought up the congregation of the Lord into this
   wilderness, that we and our cattle should die there?

   ^5And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in
   unto this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines,
   or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink.

   ^6And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the
   door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon their
   faces: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto them.

   ^7And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^8Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron
   thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall
   give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of
   the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

   ^9And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him.

   ^10And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the
   rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you
   water out of this rock?

   ^11And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock
   twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank,
   and their beasts also.

   ^12And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not,
   to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye
   shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given
   them.

   ^13This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel strove
   with the Lord, and he was sanctified in them.

   ^14And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus
   saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath
   befallen us:

   ^15How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a
   long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers:

   ^16And when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an
   angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we are in
   Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border:

   ^17Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass
   through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of
   the water of the wells: we will go by the king's high way, we will not
   turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy
   borders.

   ^18And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out
   against thee with the sword.

   ^19And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high
   way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it:
   I will only, without doing any thing else, go through on my feet.

   ^20And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against
   him with much people, and with a strong hand.

   ^21Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border:
   wherefore Israel turned away from him.

   ^22And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed
   from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.

   ^23And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast
   of the land of Edom, saying,

   ^24Aaron shall be gathered unto his people: for he shall not enter into
   the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye
   rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah.

   ^25Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor:

   ^26And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son:
   and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there.

   ^27And Moses did as the Lord commanded: and they went up into mount Hor
   in the sight of all the congregation.

   ^28And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar
   his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and
   Eleazar came down from the mount.

   ^29And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned
   for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell
   that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
   Israel, and took some of them prisoners.

   ^2And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed
   deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their
   cities.

   ^3And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the
   Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he
   called the name of the place Hormah.

   ^4And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to
   compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much
   discouraged because of the way.

   ^5And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have
   ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no
   bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light
   bread.

   ^6And the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the
   people; and much people of Israel died.

   ^7Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we
   have spoken against the Lord, and against thee; pray unto the Lord,
   that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the
   people.

   ^8And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it
   upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten,
   when he looketh upon it, shall live.

   ^9And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
   came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the
   serpent of brass, he lived.

   ^10And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.

   ^11And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the
   wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrising.

   ^12From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.

   ^13From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon,
   which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the
   Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the
   Amorites.

   ^14Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, What he
   did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon,

   ^15And at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of
   Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab.

   ^16And from thence they went to Beer: that is the well whereof the Lord
   spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them
   water.

   ^17Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:

   ^18The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by
   the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the
   wilderness they went to Mattanah:

   ^19And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:

   ^20And from Bamoth in the valley, that is in the country of Moab, to
   the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward Jeshimon.

   ^21And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,

   ^22Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the fields, or
   into the vineyards; we will not drink of the waters of the well: but we
   will go along by the king's high way, until we be past thy borders.

   ^23And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border: but
   Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel
   into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel.

   ^24And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his
   land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for the
   border of the children of Ammon was strong.

   ^25And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities
   of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.

   ^26For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had
   fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of
   his hand, even unto Arnon.

   ^27Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let
   the city of Sihon be built and prepared:

   ^28For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of
   Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of
   Arnon.

   ^29Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath
   given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto
   Sihon king of the Amorites.

   ^30We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we
   have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.

   ^31Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.

   ^32And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages
   thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.

   ^33And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the king of
   Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the battle at
   Edrei.

   ^34And the Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him
   into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to
   him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at
   Heshbon.

   ^35So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was
   none left him alive: and they possessed his land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of
   Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.

   ^2And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the
   Amorites.

   ^3And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many: and
   Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.

   ^4And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick
   up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the
   field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that
   time.

   ^5He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor,
   which is by the river of the land of the children of his people, to
   call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt:
   behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against
   me:

   ^6Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are
   too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite
   them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for I wot that he whom
   thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.

   ^7And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the
   rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and
   spake unto him the words of Balak.

   ^8And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you
   word again, as the Lord shall speak unto me: and the princes of Moab
   abode with Balaam.

   ^9And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?

   ^10And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab,
   hath sent unto me, saying,

   ^11Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, which covereth the face
   of the earth: come now, curse me them; peradventure I shall be able to
   overcome them, and drive them out.

   ^12And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt
   not curse the people: for they are blessed.

   ^13And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of
   Balak, Get you into your land: for the Lord refuseth to give me leave
   to go with you.

   ^14And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said,
   Balaam refuseth to come with us.

   ^15And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than
   they.

   ^16And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the son
   of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto me:

   ^17For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will do
   whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse me
   this people.

   ^18And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If Balak
   would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the
   word of the Lord my God, to do less or more.

   ^19Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may
   know what the Lord will say unto me more.

   ^20And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men
   come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I
   shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

   ^21And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went
   with the princes of Moab.

   ^22And God's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the
   Lord stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding
   upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.

   ^23And the ass saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way, and his
   sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way, and
   went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into the
   way.

   ^24But the angel of the Lord stood in a path of the vineyards, a wall
   being on this side, and a wall on that side.

   ^25And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she thrust herself unto
   the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall: and he smote her
   again.

   ^26And the angel of the Lord went further, and stood in a narrow place,
   where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.

   ^27And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she fell down under
   Balaam: and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a
   staff.

   ^28And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam,
   What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three
   times?

   ^29And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: I would
   there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I kill thee.

   ^30And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which thou
   hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do
   so unto thee? And he said, Nay.

   ^31Then the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the
   Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed
   down his head, and fell flat on his face.

   ^32And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten
   thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand thee,
   because thy way is perverse before me:

   ^33And the ass saw me, and turned from me these three times: unless she
   had turned from me, surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her
   alive.

   ^34And Balaam said unto the angel of the Lord, I have sinned; for I
   knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it
   displease thee, I will get me back again.

   ^35And the angel of the Lord said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but
   only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So
   Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

   ^36And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him
   unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in the
   utmost coast.

   ^37And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee to
   call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to
   promote thee to honour?

   ^38And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any
   power at all to say any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth,
   that shall I speak.

   ^39And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjathhuzoth.

   ^40And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the
   princes that were with him.

   ^41And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and
   brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see
   the utmost part of the people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me
   here seven oxen and seven rams.

   ^2And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on
   every altar a bullock and a ram.

   ^3And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will
   go: peradventure the Lord will come to meet me: and whatsoever he
   sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to an high place.

   ^4And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven
   altars, and I have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

   ^5And the Lord put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return unto
   Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

   ^6And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt sacrifice,
   he, and all the princes of Moab.

   ^7And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath
   brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come,
   curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.

   ^8How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy,
   whom the Lord hath not defied?

   ^9For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold
   him: lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among
   the nations.

   ^10Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part
   of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end
   be like his!

   ^11And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou done unto me? I took thee
   to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed them altogether.

   ^12And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which
   the Lord hath put in my mouth?

   ^13And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another
   place, from whence thou mayest see them: thou shalt see but the utmost
   part of them, and shalt not see them all: and curse me them from
   thence.

   ^14And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah,
   and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.

   ^15And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I
   meet the Lord yonder.

   ^16And the Lord met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go
   again unto Balak, and say thus.

   ^17And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering, and
   the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the
   Lord spoken?

   ^18And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear;
   hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor:

   ^19God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that
   he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he
   spoken, and shall he not make it good?

   ^20Behold, I have received commandment to bless: and he hath blessed;
   and I cannot reverse it.

   ^21He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen
   perverseness in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of
   a king is among them.

   ^22God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an
   unicorn.

   ^23Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
   divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said of
   Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!

   ^24Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up
   himself as a young lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the
   prey, and drink the blood of the slain.

   ^25And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless
   them at all.

   ^26But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee, saying,
   All that the Lord speaketh, that I must do?

   ^27And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee
   unto another place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest
   curse me them from thence.

   ^28And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh toward
   Jeshimon.

   ^29And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare
   me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

   ^30And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on
   every altar.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he went
   not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his face
   toward the wilderness.

   ^2And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents
   according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.

   ^3And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath
   said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:

   ^4He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of
   the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:

   ^5How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!

   ^6As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side,
   as the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar
   trees beside the waters.

   ^7He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in
   many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom
   shall be exalted.

   ^8God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength
   of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break
   their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.

   ^9He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
   stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
   curseth thee.

   ^10And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands
   together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine
   enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three
   times.

   ^11Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee unto
   great honour; but, lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honour.

   ^12And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers which
   thou sentest unto me, saying,

   ^13If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
   go beyond the commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine
   own mind; but what the Lord saith, that will I speak?

   ^14And now, behold, I go unto my people: come therefore, and I will
   advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter
   days.

   ^15And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath
   said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:

   ^16He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge
   of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a
   trance, but having his eyes open:

   ^17I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh:
   there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of
   Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the
   children of Sheth.

   ^18And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for
   his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.

   ^19Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
   destroy him that remaineth of the city.

   ^20And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
   Amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that
   he perish for ever.

   ^21And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said,
   Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.

   ^22Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry
   thee away captive.

   ^23And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God
   doeth this!

   ^24And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict
   Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall perish for ever.

   ^25And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak
   also went his way.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom
   with the daughters of Moab.

   ^2And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the
   people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

   ^3And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor: and the anger of the Lord
   was kindled against Israel.

   ^4And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and
   hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of
   the Lord may be turned away from Israel.

   ^5And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men
   that were joined unto Baalpeor.

   ^6And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his
   brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of
   all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping before
   the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^7And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
   saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in
   his hand;

   ^8And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of
   them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So
   the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.

   ^9And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

   ^10And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^11Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath
   turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous
   for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in
   my jealousy.

   ^12Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:

   ^13And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of
   an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made
   an atonement for the children of Israel.

   ^14Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain
   with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a
   chief house among the Simeonites.

   ^15And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the
   daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house in
   Midian.

   ^16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^17Vex the Midianites, and smite them:

   ^18For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you
   in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a
   prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain in the day of the
   plague for Peor's sake.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   And it came to pass after the plague, that the Lord spake unto Moses
   and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,

   ^2Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from
   twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that
   are able to go to war in Israel.

   ^3And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
   Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,

   ^4Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the
   Lord commanded Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out
   of the land of Egypt.

   ^5Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of
   whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the
   Palluites:

   ^6Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the
   Carmites.

   ^7These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered
   of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.

   ^8And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.

   ^9And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that
   Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who strove
   against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they
   strove against the Lord:

   ^10And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with
   Korah, when that company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred
   and fifty men: and they became a sign.

   ^11Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.

   ^12The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of
   the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the
   family of the Jachinites:

   ^13Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the
   Shaulites.

   ^14These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand
   and two hundred.

   ^15The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of
   the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the
   family of the Shunites:

   ^16Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the
   Erites:

   ^17Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the
   Arelites.

   ^18These are the families of the children of Gad according to those
   that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.

   ^19The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land
   of Canaan.

   ^20And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the
   family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of
   Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.

   ^21And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the
   Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

   ^22These are the families of Judah according to those that were
   numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.

   ^23Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of
   the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:

   ^24Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of
   the Shimronites.

   ^25These are the families of Issachar according to those that were
   numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.

   ^26Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of
   the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the
   family of the Jahleelites.

   ^27These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those that
   were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.

   ^28The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and Ephraim.

   ^29Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites:
   and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.

   ^30These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the
   Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:

   ^31And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the
   family of the Shechemites:

   ^32And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the
   family of the Hepherites.

   ^33And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the
   names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah,
   Milcah, and Tirzah.

   ^34These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of
   them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

   ^35These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah,
   the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites:
   of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

   ^36And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the
   Eranites.

   ^37These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those
   that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.
   These are the sons of Joseph after their families.

   ^38The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of
   the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the
   family of the Ahiramites:

   ^39Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of
   the Huphamites.

   ^40And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the
   Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.

   ^41These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that
   were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred.

   ^42These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the
   family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their
   families.

   ^43All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were
   numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.

   ^44Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family
   of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the
   family of the Beriites.

   ^45Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of
   Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.

   ^46And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.

   ^47These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those that
   were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four
   hundred.

   ^48Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family
   of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:

   ^49Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the
   Shillemites.

   ^50These are the families of Naphtali according to their families: and
   they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four
   hundred.

   ^51These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred
   thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.

   ^52And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^53Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to
   the number of names.

   ^54To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt
   give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be given
   according to those that were numbered of him.

   ^55Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to the
   names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.

   ^56According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between
   many and few.

   ^57And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their
   families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the
   family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.

   ^58These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites,
   the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of
   the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram.

   ^59And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi,
   whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron
   and Moses, and Miriam their sister.

   ^60And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

   ^61And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the
   Lord.

   ^62And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand,
   all males from a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among
   the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them
   among the children of Israel.

   ^63These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest,
   who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan
   near Jericho.

   ^64But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the
   priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the
   wilderness of Sinai.

   ^65For the Lord had said of them, They shall surely die in the
   wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of
   Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of
   Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of
   Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
   Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.

   ^2And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and
   before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation, saying,

   ^3Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of
   them that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company
   of Korah; but died in his own sin, and had no sons.

   ^4Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family,
   because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a possession among the
   brethren of our father.

   ^5And Moses brought their cause before the Lord.

   ^6And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^7The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them
   a possession of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou
   shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.

   ^8And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man
   die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto
   his daughter.

   ^9And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto
   his brethren.

   ^10And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto
   his father's brethren.

   ^11And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
   inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
   shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute
   of judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^12And the Lord said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount Abarim,
   and see the land which I have given unto the children of Israel.

   ^13And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
   people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.

   ^14For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in the
   strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before their
   eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.

   ^15And Moses spake unto the Lord, saying,

   ^16Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over
   the congregation,

   ^17Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and
   which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
   congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

   ^18And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man
   in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;

   ^19And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the
   congregation; and give him a charge in their sight.

   ^20And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
   congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.

   ^21And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel
   for him after the judgment of Urim before the Lord: at his word shall
   they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the
   children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.

   ^22And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set
   him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:

   ^23And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord
   commanded by the hand of Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and
   my bread for my sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me,
   shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season.

   ^3And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire which
   ye shall offer unto the Lord; two lambs of the first year without spot
   day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

   ^4The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
   shalt thou offer at even;

   ^5And a tenth part of an ephah of flour for a meat offering, mingled
   with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil.

   ^6It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai
   for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^7And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin for
   the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be
   poured unto the Lord for a drink offering.

   ^8And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of
   the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it, a
   sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.

   ^9And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and
   two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and the
   drink offering thereof:

   ^10This is the burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual
   burnt offering, and his drink offering.

   ^11And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering
   unto the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the
   first year without spot;

   ^12And three tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with
   oil, for one bullock; and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering,
   mingled with oil, for one ram;

   ^13And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat
   offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a
   sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^14And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a
   bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of
   an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month
   throughout the months of the year.

   ^15And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the Lord shall be
   offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.

   ^16And in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of the
   Lord.

   ^17And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days
   shall unleavened bread be eaten.

   ^18In the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no manner
   of servile work therein:

   ^19But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire for a burnt offering
   unto the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the
   first year: they shall be unto you without blemish:

   ^20And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil: three
   tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a
   ram;

   ^21A several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb, throughout the
   seven lambs:

   ^22And one goat for a sin offering, to make an atonement for you.

   ^23Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning, which
   is for a continual burnt offering.

   ^24After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days,
   the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the
   Lord: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and his
   drink offering.

   ^25And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall
   do no servile work.

   ^26Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat
   offering unto the Lord, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy
   convocation; ye shall do no servile work:

   ^27But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the
   Lord; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year;

   ^28And their meat offering of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals
   unto one bullock, two tenth deals unto one ram,

   ^29A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs;

   ^30And one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you.

   ^31Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his
   meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their drink
   offerings.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have
   an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of
   blowing the trumpets unto you.

   ^2And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord;
   one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year without
   blemish:

   ^3And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three
   tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram,

   ^4And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:

   ^5And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an atonement for
   you:

   ^6Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and
   the daily burnt offering, and his meat offering, and their drink
   offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice
   made by fire unto the Lord.

   ^7And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy
   convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work
   therein:

   ^8But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord for a sweet savour;
   one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year; they
   shall be unto you without blemish:

   ^9And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three
   tenth deals to a bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram,

   ^10A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:

   ^11One kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of
   atonement, and the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of
   it, and their drink offerings.

   ^12And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy
   convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast
   unto the Lord seven days:

   ^13And ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a
   sweet savour unto the Lord; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and
   fourteen lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish:

   ^14And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three
   tenth deals unto every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth
   deals to each ram of the two rams,

   ^15And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs:

   ^16And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual
   burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^17And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two
   rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:

   ^18And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks,
   for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number,
   after the manner:

   ^19And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual
   burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their drink
   offerings.

   ^20And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of
   the first year without blemish;

   ^21And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks,
   for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number,
   after the manner:

   ^22And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
   offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^23And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of
   the first year without blemish:

   ^24Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for
   the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after
   the manner:

   ^25And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual
   burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^26And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of
   the first year without spot:

   ^27And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks,
   for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number,
   after the manner:

   ^28And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
   offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^29And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of
   the first year without blemish:

   ^30And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks,
   for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number,
   after the manner:

   ^31And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
   offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^32And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
   of the first year without blemish:

   ^33And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks,
   for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number,
   after the manner:

   ^34And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
   offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^35On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no
   servile work therein:

   ^36But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a
   sweet savour unto the Lord: one bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the
   first year without blemish:

   ^37Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for
   the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after
   the manner:

   ^38And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
   offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

   ^39These things ye shall do unto the Lord in your set feasts, beside
   your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and
   for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for your
   peace offerings.

   ^40And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the Lord
   commanded Moses.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of
   Israel, saying, This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.

   ^2If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul
   with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
   that proceedeth out of his mouth.

   ^3If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond,
   being in her father's house in her youth;

   ^4And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound
   her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then all her vows
   shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall
   stand.

   ^5But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of
   her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall
   stand: and the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed
   her.

   ^6And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered ought
   out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul;

   ^7And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that
   he heard it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she
   bound her soul shall stand.

   ^8But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it; then
   he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered with
   her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the Lord
   shall forgive her.

   ^9But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they
   have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

   ^10And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond
   with an oath;

   ^11And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disallowed
   her not: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she
   bound her soul shall stand.

   ^12But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard
   them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or
   concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath made
   them void; and the Lord shall forgive her.

   ^13Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband
   may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

   ^14But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day;
   then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon
   her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day
   that he heard them.

   ^15But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
   them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

   ^16These are the statutes, which the Lord commanded Moses, between a
   man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her
   youth in her father's house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou
   be gathered unto thy people.

   ^3And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto
   the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of
   Midian.

   ^4Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall
   ye send to the war.

   ^5So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of
   every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

   ^6And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and
   Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
   instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

   ^7And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses;
   and they slew all the males.

   ^8And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were
   slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings
   of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.

   ^9And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives, and
   their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
   their flocks, and all their goods.

   ^10And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their
   goodly castles, with fire.

   ^11And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of
   beasts.

   ^12And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
   Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
   children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by
   Jordan near Jericho.

   ^13And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
   congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

   ^14And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the captains
   over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the battle.

   ^15And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?

   ^16Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of
   Balaam, to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and
   there was a plague among the congregation of the Lord.

   ^17Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every
   woman that hath known man by lying with him.

   ^18But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with
   him, keep alive for yourselves.

   ^19And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed
   any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both
   yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.

   ^20And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and all
   work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.

   ^21And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the
   battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord commanded
   Moses;

   ^22Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the
   lead,

   ^23Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the
   fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the
   water of separation: and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make go
   through the water.

   ^24And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be
   clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

   ^25And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^26Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast,
   thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the
   congregation:

   ^27And divide the prey into two parts; between them that took the war
   upon them, who went out to battle, and between all the congregation:

   ^28And levy a tribute unto the Lord of the men of war which went out to
   battle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the
   beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep:

   ^29Take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, for an
   heave offering of the Lord.

   ^30And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one portion of
   fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks,
   of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites, which keep the
   charge of the tabernacle of the Lord.

   ^31And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^32And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had
   caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand
   sheep,

   ^33And threescore and twelve thousand beeves,

   ^34And threescore and one thousand asses,

   ^35And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of women that had not
   known man by lying with him.

   ^36And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war,
   was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and
   five hundred sheep:

   ^37And the Lord'S tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore
   and fifteen.

   ^38And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the Lord'S
   tribute was threescore and twelve.

   ^39And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the
   Lord'S tribute was threescore and one.

   ^40And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the Lord'S tribute
   was thirty and two persons.

   ^41And Moses gave the tribute, which was the Lord'S heave offering,
   unto Eleazar the priest, as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^42And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided from the
   men that warred,

   ^43(Now the half that pertained unto the congregation was three hundred
   thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep,

   ^44And thirty and six thousand beeves,

   ^45And thirty thousand asses and five hundred,

   ^46And sixteen thousand persons;)

   ^47Even of the children of Israel's half, Moses took one portion of
   fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which
   kept the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord; as the Lord commanded
   Moses.

   ^48And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains
   of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:

   ^49And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men
   of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.

   ^50We have therefore brought an oblation for the Lord, what every man
   hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, earrings,
   and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the Lord.

   ^51And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
   wrought jewels.

   ^52And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the Lord,
   of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was
   sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.

   ^53(For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)

   ^54And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of
   thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the
   congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great
   multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land
   of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;

   ^2The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto
   Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
   congregation, saying,

   ^3Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh,
   and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,

   ^4Even the country which the Lord smote before the congregation of
   Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle:

   ^5Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this
   land be given unto thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over
   Jordan.

   ^6And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of
   Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?

   ^7And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from
   going over into the land which the Lord hath given them?

   ^8Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the
   land.

   ^9For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land,
   they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should
   not go into the land which the Lord had given them.

   ^10And the Lord'S anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
   saying,

   ^11Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years
   old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto
   Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly followed me:

   ^12Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of
   Nun: for they have wholly followed the Lord.

   ^13And the Lord'S anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them
   wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that
   had done evil in the sight of the Lord, was consumed.

   ^14And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of
   sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel.

   ^15For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in
   the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.

   ^16And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here
   for our cattle, and cities for our little ones:

   ^17But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel,
   until we have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall
   dwell in the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.

   ^18We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel
   have inherited every man his inheritance.

   ^19For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward;
   because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward.

   ^20And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go
   armed before the Lord to war,

   ^21And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he
   hath driven out his enemies from before him,

   ^22And the land be subdued before the Lord: then afterward ye shall
   return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel; and this
   land shall be your possession before the Lord.

   ^23But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord:
   and be sure your sin will find you out.

   ^24Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and
   do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

   ^25And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses,
   saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

   ^26Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be
   there in the cities of Gilead:

   ^27But thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the
   Lord to battle, as my lord saith.

   ^28So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
   the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of
   Israel:

   ^29And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of
   Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every man armed to battle,
   before the Lord, and the land shall be subdued before you; then ye
   shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession:

   ^30But if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have
   possessions among you in the land of Canaan.

   ^31And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying,
   As the Lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

   ^32We will pass over armed before the Lord into the land of Canaan,
   that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be ours.

   ^33And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the
   children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of
   Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of
   Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
   even the cities of the country round about.

   ^34And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,

   ^35And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,

   ^36And Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.

   ^37And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and
   Kirjathaim,

   ^38And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah:
   and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.

   ^39And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and
   took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.

   ^40And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt
   therein.

   ^41And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof,
   and called them Havothjair.

   ^42And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called
   it Nobah, after his own name.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out
   of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and
   Aaron.

   ^2And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the
   commandment of the Lord: and these are their journeys according to
   their goings out.

   ^3And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth
   day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the children
   of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians.

   ^4For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the Lord had
   smitten among them: upon their gods also the Lord executed judgments.

   ^5And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in
   Succoth.

   ^6And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the
   edge of the wilderness.

   ^7And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth, which
   is before Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol.

   ^8And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the
   midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
   the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.

   ^9And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were
   twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they
   pitched there.

   ^10And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.

   ^11And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of
   Sin.

   ^12And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and
   encamped in Dophkah.

   ^13And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.

   ^14And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was no
   water for the people to drink.

   ^15And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of
   Sinai.

   ^16And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
   Kibrothhattaavah.

   ^17And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.

   ^18And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.

   ^19And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez.

   ^20And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah.

   ^21And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.

   ^22And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.

   ^23And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.

   ^24And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.

   ^25And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.

   ^26And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.

   ^27And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.

   ^28And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.

   ^29And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.

   ^30And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.

   ^31And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan.

   ^32And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad.

   ^33And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.

   ^34And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.

   ^35And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber.

   ^36And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness of
   Zin, which is Kadesh.

   ^37And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge
   of the land of Edom.

   ^38And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of
   the Lord, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of
   Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the
   fifth month.

   ^39And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he died
   in mount Hor.

   ^40And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the land of
   Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.

   ^41And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.

   ^42And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.

   ^43And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.

   ^44And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the
   border of Moab.

   ^45And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad.

   ^46And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim.

   ^47And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the mountains
   of Abarim, before Nebo.

   ^48And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the
   plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.

   ^49And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto Abelshittim
   in the plains of Moab.

   ^50And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near
   Jericho, saying,

   ^51Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are
   passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;

   ^52Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before
   you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their molten
   images, and quite pluck down all their high places:

   ^53And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell
   therein: for I have given you the land to possess it.

   ^54And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your
   families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to
   the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's inheritance
   shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of
   your fathers ye shall inherit.

   ^55But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before
   you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them
   shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex
   you in the land wherein ye dwell.

   ^56Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I
   thought to do unto them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^2Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into
   the land of Canaan; (this is the land that shall fall unto you for an
   inheritance, even the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:)

   ^3Then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by
   the coast of Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of
   the salt sea eastward:

   ^4And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim,
   and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be from the south
   to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and pass on to Azmon:

   ^5And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of
   Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.

   ^6And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a
   border: this shall be your west border.

   ^7And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
   point out for you mount Hor:

   ^8From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of
   Hamath; and the goings forth of the border shall be to Zedad:

   ^9And the border shall go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall
   be at Hazar- enan: this shall be your north border.

   ^10And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to Shepham:

   ^11And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side
   of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of
   the sea of Chinnereth eastward:

   ^12And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it
   shall be at the salt sea: this shall be your land with the coasts
   thereof round about.

   ^13And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the land
   which ye shall inherit by lot, which the Lord commanded to give unto
   the nine tribes, and to the half tribe:

   ^14For the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house of
   their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to the
   house of their fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the
   tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance:

   ^15The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on
   this side Jordan near Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

   ^16And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^17These are the names of the men which shall divide the land unto you:
   Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.

   ^18And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by
   inheritance.

   ^19And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the
   son of Jephunneh.

   ^20And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of
   Ammihud.

   ^21Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.

   ^22And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of
   Jogli.

   ^23The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children
   of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.

   ^24And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the
   son of Shiphtan.

   ^25And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan
   the son of Parnach.

   ^26And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the
   son of Azzan.

   ^27And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son
   of Shelomi.

   ^28And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the
   son of Ammihud.

   ^29These are they whom the Lord commanded to divide the inheritance
   unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near
   Jericho, saying,

   ^2Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of
   the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in; and ye shall
   give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round about them.

   ^3And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of them
   shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
   beasts.

   ^4And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites,
   shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits
   round about.

   ^5And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two
   thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the
   west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
   cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the
   suburbs of the cities.

   ^6And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there shall
   be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer,
   that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty and two
   cities.

   ^7So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty
   and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

   ^8And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the
   children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many; but
   from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of his
   cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he
   inheriteth.

   ^9And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

   ^10Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be
   come over Jordan into the land of Canaan;

   ^11Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you;
   that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.

   ^12And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that
   the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in
   judgment.

   ^13And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for
   refuge.

   ^14Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities
   shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.

   ^15These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel,
   and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one
   that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.

   ^16And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he
   is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

   ^17And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and
   he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

   ^18Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may
   die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
   death.

   ^19The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he
   meeteth him, he shall slay him.

   ^20But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait,
   that he die;

   ^21Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him
   shall surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of
   blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.

   ^22But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon him
   any thing without laying of wait,

   ^23Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast
   it upon him, that he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his
   harm:

   ^24Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the
   revenger of blood according to these judgments:

   ^25And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the
   revenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to the city
   of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the
   death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.

   ^26But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the
   city of his refuge, whither he was fled;

   ^27And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city
   of his refuge, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not
   be guilty of blood:

   ^28Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the
   death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the
   slayer shall return into the land of his possession.

   ^29So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you
   throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

   ^30Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the
   mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any
   person to cause him to die.

   ^31Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer,
   which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to death.

   ^32And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city
   of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until
   the death of the priest.

   ^33So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
   defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is
   shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

   ^34Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I
   dwell: for I the Lord dwell among the children of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the
   son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of
   Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the
   chief fathers of the children of Israel:

   ^2And they said, The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an
   inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and my lord was commanded
   by the Lord to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his
   daughters.

   ^3And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the
   children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
   inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the
   tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of
   our inheritance.

   ^4And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall
   their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto
   they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away from the
   inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

   ^5And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of
   the Lord, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.

   ^6This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the
   daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think
   best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.

   ^7So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from
   tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall keep
   himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

   ^8And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of
   the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
   tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man
   the inheritance of his fathers.

   ^9Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe;
   but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall keep
   himself to his own inheritance.

   ^10Even as the Lord commanded Moses, so did the daughters of
   Zelophehad:

   ^11For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters
   of Zelophehad, were married unto their father's brothers' sons:

   ^12And they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the
   son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the
   family of their father.

   ^13These are the commandments and the judgments, which the Lord
   commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the
   plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Fifth Book of Moses, called

Deuteronomy
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side
   Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea,
   between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.

   ^2(There are eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir
   unto Kadeshbarnea.)

   ^3And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on
   the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of
   Israel, according unto all that the Lord had given him in commandment
   unto them;

   ^4After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in
   Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei:

   ^5On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this
   law, saying,

   ^6The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long
   enough in this mount:

   ^7Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites,
   and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and
   in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the
   Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river
   Euphrates.

   ^8Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
   which the Lord sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to
   give unto them and to their seed after them.

   ^9And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you
   myself alone:

   ^10The Lord your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day
   as the stars of heaven for multitude.

   ^11(The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more
   as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)

   ^12How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and
   your strife?

   ^13Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes,
   and I will make them rulers over you.

   ^14And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is
   good for us to do.

   ^15So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
   them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over
   hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and
   officers among your tribes.

   ^16And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes
   between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
   brother, and the stranger that is with him.

   ^17Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
   small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
   for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too hard for you,
   bring it unto me, and I will hear it.

   ^18And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.

   ^19And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great and
   terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the
   Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us; and we came to
   Kadeshbarnea.

   ^20And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites,
   which the Lord our God doth give unto us.

   ^21Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and
   possess it, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear
   not, neither be discouraged.

   ^22And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send
   men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us word
   again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall come.

   ^23And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one of
   a tribe:

   ^24And they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the
   valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.

   ^25And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought
   it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a good land
   which the Lord our God doth give us.

   ^26Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the
   commandment of the Lord your God:

   ^27And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the Lord hated us,
   he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into
   the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.

   ^28Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart,
   saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great
   and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the
   Anakims there.

   ^29Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.

   ^30The Lord your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you,
   according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;

   ^31And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the Lord thy
   God bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went,
   until ye came into this place.

   ^32Yet in this thing ye did not believe the Lord your God,

   ^33Who went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch
   your tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go,
   and in a cloud by day.

   ^34And the Lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
   sware, saying,

   ^35Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see
   that good land, which I sware to give unto your fathers,

   ^36Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I
   give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children, because
   he hath wholly followed the Lord.

   ^37Also the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also
   shalt not go in thither.

   ^38But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall go
   in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.

   ^39Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your
   children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil,
   they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall
   possess it.

   ^40But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness
   by the way of the Red sea.

   ^41Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the Lord,
   we will go up and fight, according to all that the Lord our God
   commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war,
   ye were ready to go up into the hill.

   ^42And the Lord said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight;
   for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

   ^43So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the
   commandment of the Lord, and went presumptuously up into the hill.

   ^44And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
   you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto
   Hormah.

   ^45And ye returned and wept before the Lord; but the Lord would not
   hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

   ^46So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye
   abode there.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of
   the Red sea, as the Lord spake unto me: and we compassed mount Seir
   many days.

   ^2And the Lord spake unto me, saying,

   ^3Ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.

   ^4And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the coast
   of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and they
   shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore:

   ^5Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their land, no, not
   so much as a foot breadth; because I have given mount Seir unto Esau
   for a possession.

   ^6Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
   also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

   ^7For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy hand:
   he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years
   the Lord thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked nothing.

   ^8And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which
   dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from
   Eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.

   ^9And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend
   with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land for a
   possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a
   possession.

   ^10The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and
   tall, as the Anakims;

   ^11Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites
   call them Emims.

   ^12The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau
   succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and
   dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his possession,
   which the Lord gave unto them.

   ^13Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered. And we went
   over the brook Zered.

   ^14And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were come
   over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the
   generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as
   the Lord sware unto them.

   ^15For indeed the hand of the Lord was against them, to destroy them
   from among the host, until they were consumed.

   ^16So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead
   from among the people,

   ^17That the Lord spake unto me, saying,

   ^18Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:

   ^19And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon,
   distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of
   the land of the children of Ammon any possession; because I have given
   it unto the children of Lot for a possession.

   ^20(That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in
   old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims;

   ^21A people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the Lord
   destroyed them before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their
   stead:

   ^22As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he
   destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and
   dwelt in their stead even unto this day:

   ^23And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the
   Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt
   in their stead.)

   ^24Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon:
   behold, I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of
   Heshbon, and his land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in
   battle.

   ^25This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee
   upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report
   of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.

   ^26And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon
   king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,

   ^27Let me pass through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I
   will neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left.

   ^28Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me water
   for money, that I may drink: only I will pass through on my feet;

   ^29(As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which
   dwell in Ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over Jordan into the land
   which the Lord our God giveth us.

   ^30But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the Lord
   thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he
   might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.

   ^31And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and
   his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
   land.

   ^32Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at
   Jahaz.

   ^33And the Lord our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and
   his sons, and all his people.

   ^34And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the
   men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left none to
   remain:

   ^35Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of
   the cities which we took.

   ^36From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from
   the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city
   too strong for us: the Lord our God delivered all unto us:

   ^37Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor
   unto any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the
   mountains, nor unto whatsoever the Lord our God forbad us.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of
   Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.

   ^2And the Lord said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and
   all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him
   as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.

   ^3So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of
   Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to him
   remaining.

   ^4And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city which
   we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the
   kingdom of Og in Bashan.

   ^5All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars; beside
   unwalled towns a great many.

   ^6And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon,
   utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city.

   ^7But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey
   to ourselves.

   ^8And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the
   Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon
   unto mount Hermon;

   ^9(Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion; and the Amorites call it
   Shenir;)

   ^10All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto
   Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

   ^11For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants;
   behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of
   the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four
   cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

   ^12And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which is
   by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave
   I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.

   ^13And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og,
   gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with
   all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.

   ^14Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the
   coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name,
   Bashan- Havothjair, unto this day.

   ^15And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

   ^16And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even
   unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto the
   river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;

   ^17The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth
   even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah
   eastward.

   ^18And I commanded you at that time, saying, The Lord your God hath
   given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before your
   brethren the children of Israel, all that are meet for the war.

   ^19But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for I know
   that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have
   given you;

   ^20Until the Lord have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto
   you, and until they also possess the land which the Lord your God hath
   given them beyond Jordan: and then shall ye return every man unto his
   possession, which I have given you.

   ^21And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen
   all that the Lord your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall the
   Lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

   ^22Ye shall not fear them: for the Lord your God he shall fight for
   you.

   ^23And I besought the Lord at that time, saying,

   ^24O Lord GOD, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and
   thy mighty hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can
   do according to thy works, and according to thy might?

   ^25I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond
   Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

   ^26But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
   me: and the Lord said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
   me of this matter.

   ^27Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward,
   and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it with thine
   eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

   ^28But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
   shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
   the land which thou shalt see.

   ^29So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the
   judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
   in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you.

   ^2Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
   diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord
   your God which I command you.

   ^3Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baalpeor: for all
   the men that followed Baalpeor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed them
   from among you.

   ^4But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of
   you this day.

   ^5Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my
   God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
   possess it.

   ^6Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
   understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
   statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding
   people.

   ^7For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as
   the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

   ^8And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments
   so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?

   ^9Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou
   forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from
   thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy
   sons' sons;

   ^10Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in
   Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I
   will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the
   days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their
   children.

   ^11And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain
   burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and
   thick darkness.

   ^12And the Lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard
   the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a voice.

   ^13And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
   perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of
   stone.

   ^14And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and
   judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to
   possess it.

   ^15Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of
   similitude on the day that the Lord spake unto you in Horeb out of the
   midst of the fire:

   ^16Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the
   similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female,

   ^17The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any
   winged fowl that flieth in the air,

   ^18The likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness
   of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth:

   ^19And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest
   the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven,
   shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the Lord thy
   God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.

   ^20But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron
   furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as
   ye are this day.

   ^21Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, and sware
   that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that
   good land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance:

   ^22But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shall
   go over, and possess that good land.

   ^23Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord
   your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or the
   likeness of any thing, which the Lord thy God hath forbidden thee.

   ^24For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.

   ^25When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye
   shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and
   make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in
   the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger:

   ^26I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye
   shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan
   to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall
   utterly be destroyed.

   ^27And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
   left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you.

   ^28And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
   stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

   ^29But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find
   him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

   ^30When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
   thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and
   shalt be obedient unto his voice;

   ^31(For the Lord thy God is a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee,
   neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he
   sware unto them.

   ^32For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since
   the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side
   of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such thing as
   this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?

   ^33Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of
   the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

   ^34Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of
   another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war,
   and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors,
   according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before
   your eyes?

   ^35Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the Lord he is
   God; there is none else beside him.

   ^36Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct
   thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou heardest
   his words out of the midst of the fire.

   ^37And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
   after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power out
   of Egypt;

   ^38To drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou
   art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as
   it is this day.

   ^39Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
   Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
   none else.

   ^40Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments, which
   I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy
   children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the
   earth, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, for ever.

   ^41Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the
   sunrising;

   ^42That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill his neighbour
   unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that fleeing unto one of
   these cities he might live:

   ^43Namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the
   Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan,
   of the Manassites.

   ^44And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel:

   ^45These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments,
   which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they came forth
   out of Egypt,

   ^46On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Bethpeor, in the
   land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses
   and the children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of
   Egypt:

   ^47And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two
   kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan toward the
   sunrising;

   ^48From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount
   Sion, which is Hermon,

   ^49And all the plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of
   the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the
   statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may
   learn them, and keep, and do them.

   ^2The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.

   ^3The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even
   us, who are all of us here alive this day.

   ^4The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst
   of the fire,

   ^5(I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the word
   of the Lord: for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up
   into the mount;) saying,

   ^6I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
   from the house of bondage.

   ^7Thou shalt have none other gods before me.

   ^8Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
   thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that
   is in the waters beneath the earth:

   ^9Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the
   Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
   upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
   hate me,

   ^10And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
   commandments.

   ^11Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the
   Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

   ^12Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath
   commanded thee.

   ^13Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work:

   ^14But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou
   shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
   manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any
   of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy
   manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

   ^15And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that
   the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a
   stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep
   the sabbath day.

   ^16Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded
   thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with
   thee, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

   ^17Thou shalt not kill.

   ^18Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

   ^19Neither shalt thou steal.

   ^20Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.

   ^21Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt thou
   covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his
   maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour's.

   ^22These words the Lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount out
   of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with
   a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of
   stone, and delivered them unto me.

   ^23And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the
   darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto
   me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;

   ^24And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath shewed us his glory and
   his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the
   fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.

   ^25Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
   us: if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall
   die.

   ^26For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the
   living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
   lived?

   ^27Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say: and
   speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and
   we will hear it, and do it.

   ^28And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me;
   and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this
   people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that
   they have spoken.

   ^29O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
   and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
   and with their children for ever!

   ^30Go say to them, Get you into your tents again.

   ^31But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee
   all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou
   shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them
   to possess it.

   ^32Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God hath commanded
   you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.

   ^33Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God hath commanded
   you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye
   may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which
   the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the
   land whither ye go to possess it:

   ^2That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes
   and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy
   son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be
   prolonged.

   ^3Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well
   with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy
   fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
   honey.

   ^4Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:

   ^5And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with
   all thy soul, and with all thy might.

   ^6And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine
   heart:

   ^7And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt
   talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by
   the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

   ^8And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall
   be as frontlets between thine eyes.

   ^9And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
   gates.

   ^10And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into
   the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
   Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not,

   ^11And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and
   wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which
   thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;

   ^12Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out
   of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

   ^13Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by
   his name.

   ^14Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which
   are round about you;

   ^15(For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you) lest the anger of
   the Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the
   face of the earth.

   ^16Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.

   ^17Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God, and
   his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

   ^18And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the
   Lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in and
   possess the good land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers,

   ^19To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the Lord hath
   spoken.

   ^20And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean the
   testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord our
   God hath commanded you?

   ^21Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in
   Egypt; and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand:

   ^22And the Lord shewed signs and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt,
   upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before our eyes:

   ^23And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to
   give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

   ^24And the Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord
   our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is
   at this day.

   ^25And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
   commandments before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest
   to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the
   Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites,
   and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations
   greater and mightier than thou;

   ^2And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt
   smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with
   them, nor shew mercy unto them:

   ^3Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt
   not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

   ^4For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
   serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you,
   and destroy thee suddenly.

   ^5But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and
   break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
   graven images with fire.

   ^6For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God
   hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people
   that are upon the face of the earth.

   ^7The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
   were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all
   people:

   ^8But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath
   which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out
   with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from
   the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

   ^9Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God,
   which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his
   commandments to a thousand generations;

   ^10And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he
   will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his
   face.

   ^11Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
   the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.

   ^12Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments,
   and keep, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the
   covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:

   ^13And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will
   also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn,
   and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
   of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

   ^14Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male or
   female barren among you, or among your cattle.

   ^15And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
   none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
   will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

   ^16And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall
   deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt
   thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

   ^17If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how
   can I dispossess them?

   ^18Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but shalt well remember what the
   Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;

   ^19The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the
   wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the
   Lord thy God brought thee out: so shall the Lord thy God do unto all
   the people of whom thou art afraid.

   ^20Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until
   they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

   ^21Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the Lord thy God is among
   you, a mighty God and terrible.

   ^22And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by
   little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the
   beasts of the field increase upon thee.

   ^23But the Lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy
   them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

   ^24And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt
   destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to
   stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

   ^25The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt
   not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
   lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy
   God.

   ^26Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou
   be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou
   shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to
   do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land
   which the Lord sware unto your fathers.

   ^2And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee
   these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee,
   to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
   commandments, or no.

   ^3And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with
   manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he
   might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every
   word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live.

   ^4Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell,
   these forty years.

   ^5Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
   his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.

   ^6Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, to
   walk in his ways, and to fear him.

   ^7For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks
   of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;

   ^8A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and
   pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;

   ^9A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt
   not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of
   whose hills thou mayest dig brass.

   ^10When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord
   thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

   ^11Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his
   commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee
   this day:

   ^12Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly
   houses, and dwelt therein;

   ^13And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy
   gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;

   ^14Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God,
   which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
   bondage;

   ^15Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein
   were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no
   water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;

   ^16Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew
   not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do
   thee good at thy latter end;

   ^17And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand
   hath gotten me this wealth.

   ^18But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth
   thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he
   sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

   ^19And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk
   after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against
   you this day that ye shall surely perish.

   ^20As the nations which the Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall
   ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord
   your God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to
   possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and
   fenced up to heaven,

   ^2A people great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou
   knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the
   children of Anak!

   ^3Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is he which
   goeth over before thee; as a consuming fire he shall destroy them, and
   he shall bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out,
   and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath said unto thee.

   ^4Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast
   them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath
   brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these
   nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee.

   ^5Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
   dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
   nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and that
   he may perform the word which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, Abraham,
   Isaac, and Jacob.

   ^6Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good
   land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiffnecked
   people.

   ^7Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to
   wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the
   land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious
   against the Lord.

   ^8Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath, so that the Lord was
   angry with you to have destroyed you.

   ^9When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,
   even the tables of the covenant which the Lord made with you, then I
   abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat bread
   nor drink water:

   ^10And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the
   finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words,
   which the Lord spake with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire
   in the day of the assembly.

   ^11And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, that
   the Lord gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
   covenant.

   ^12And the Lord said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from hence;
   for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have
   corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way
   which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

   ^13Furthermore the Lord spake unto me, saying, I have seen this people,
   and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:

   ^14Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from
   under heaven: and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater
   than they.

   ^15So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with
   fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.

   ^16And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the Lord your God,
   and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the
   way which the Lord had commanded you.

   ^17And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
   brake them before your eyes.

   ^18And I fell down before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and
   forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
   your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord,
   to provoke him to anger.

   ^19For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
   Lord was wroth against you to destroy you. But the Lord hearkened unto
   me at that time also.

   ^20And the Lord was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I
   prayed for Aaron also the same time.

   ^21And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with
   fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was as
   small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that
   descended out of the mount.

   ^22And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibrothhattaavah, ye provoked
   the Lord to wrath.

   ^23Likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up and
   possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against the
   commandment of the Lord your God, and ye believed him not, nor
   hearkened to his voice.

   ^24Ye have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew
   you.

   ^25Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as I
   fell down at the first; because the Lord had said he would destroy you.

   ^26I prayed therefore unto the Lord, and said, O Lord GOD, destroy not
   thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through thy
   greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty
   hand.

   ^27Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the
   stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin:

   ^28Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the Lord
   was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them, and
   because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the
   wilderness.

   ^29Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest
   out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   At that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like
   unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee an
   ark of wood.

   ^2And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first
   tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

   ^3And I made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like
   unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables in
   mine hand.

   ^4And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten
   commandments, which the Lord spake unto you in the mount out of the
   midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the Lord gave them
   unto me.

   ^5And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables
   in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the Lord commanded
   me.

   ^6And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the
   children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was
   buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
   stead.

   ^7From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to
   Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

   ^8At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of
   the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord to minister unto
   him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

   ^9Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the
   Lord is his inheritance, according as the Lord thy God promised him.

   ^10And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days
   and forty nights; and the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also, and
   the Lord would not destroy thee.

   ^11And the Lord said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the
   people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto
   their fathers to give unto them.

   ^12And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
   fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
   serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,

   ^13To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, which I
   command thee this day for thy good?

   ^14Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lord'S thy God,
   the earth also, with all that therein is.

   ^15Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he
   chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this
   day.

   ^16Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
   stiffnecked.

   ^17For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great
   God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
   reward:

   ^18He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth
   the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

   ^19Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of
   Egypt.

   ^20Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him
   shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

   ^21He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee these
   great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.

   ^22Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons;
   and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for
   multitude.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and
   his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.

   ^2And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which have
   not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your
   God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,

   ^3And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt
   unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land;

   ^4And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to
   their chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them
   as they pursued after you, and how the Lord hath destroyed them unto
   this day;

   ^5And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came into this
   place;

   ^6And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of
   Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and
   their households, and their tents, and all the substance that was in
   their possession, in the midst of all Israel:

   ^7But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did.

   ^8Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this
   day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye
   go to possess it;

   ^9And that ye may prolong your days in the land, which the Lord sware
   unto your fathers to give unto them and to their seed, a land that
   floweth with milk and honey.

   ^10For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
   land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
   and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:

   ^11But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and
   valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven:

   ^12A land which the Lord thy God careth for: the eyes of the Lord thy
   God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the
   end of the year.

   ^13And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my
   commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God,
   and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,

   ^14That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the
   first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn,
   and thy wine, and thine oil.

   ^15And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest
   eat and be full.

   ^16Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
   turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;

   ^17And then the Lord'S wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the
   heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit;
   and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth
   you.

   ^18Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your
   soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as
   frontlets between your eyes.

   ^19And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou
   sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou
   liest down, and when thou risest up.

   ^20And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and
   upon thy gates:

   ^21That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in
   the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the
   days of heaven upon the earth.

   ^22For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I
   command you, to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his
   ways, and to cleave unto him;

   ^23Then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, and
   ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than yourselves.

   ^24Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
   yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river
   Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

   ^25There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the Lord your
   God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land
   that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

   ^26Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse;

   ^27A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which
   I command you this day:

   ^28And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your
   God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go
   after other gods, which ye have not known.

   ^29And it shall come to pass, when the Lord thy God hath brought thee
   in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put
   the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.

   ^30Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun
   goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign
   over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?

   ^31For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the
   Lord your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

   ^32And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which I
   set before you this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in
   the land, which the Lord God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it,
   all the days that ye live upon the earth.

   ^2Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye
   shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the
   hills, and under every green tree:

   ^3And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and
   burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of
   their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place.

   ^4Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God.

   ^5But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all
   your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye
   seek, and thither thou shalt come:

   ^6And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices,
   and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and
   your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your
   flocks:

   ^7And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice
   in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the
   Lord thy God hath blessed thee.

   ^8Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every
   man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

   ^9For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which
   the Lord your God giveth you.

   ^10But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord
   your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
   your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety;

   ^11Then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to
   cause his name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I
   command you; your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes,
   and the heave offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye
   vow unto the Lord:

   ^12And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons,
   and your daughters, and your menservants, and your maidservants, and
   the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor
   inheritance with you.

   ^13Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
   every place that thou seest:

   ^14But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes,
   there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shalt do all
   that I command thee.

   ^15Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates,
   whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
   Lord thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
   eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

   ^16Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as
   water.

   ^17Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of
   thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
   flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
   offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:

   ^18But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which
   the Lord thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and
   thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy
   gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou
   puttest thine hands unto.

   ^19Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as
   thou livest upon the earth.

   ^20When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath promised
   thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to
   eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

   ^21If the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to put his name
   there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy
   flock, which the Lord hath given thee, as I have commanded thee, and
   thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

   ^22Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them:
   the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

   ^23Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life;
   and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

   ^24Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.

   ^25Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with thy
   children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
   sight of the Lord.

   ^26Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take,
   and go unto the place which the Lord shall choose:

   ^27And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood,
   upon the altar of the Lord thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices
   shall be poured out upon the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou shalt
   eat the flesh.

   ^28Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may
   go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou
   doest that which is good and right in the sight of the Lord thy God.

   ^29When the Lord thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee,
   whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and
   dwellest in their land;

   ^30Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them,
   after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire
   not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods?
   even so will I do likewise.

   ^31Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God: for every abomination to
   the Lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even
   their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their
   gods.

   ^32What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not
   add thereto, nor diminish from it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth
   thee a sign or a wonder,

   ^2And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee,
   saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let
   us serve them;

   ^3Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that
   dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether
   ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

   ^4Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his
   commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
   unto him.

   ^5And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death;
   because he hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which
   brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house
   of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God
   commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the
   midst of thee.

   ^6If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
   or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul,
   entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which
   thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

   ^7Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh
   unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even
   unto the other end of the earth;

   ^8Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall
   thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou
   conceal him:

   ^9But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to
   put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

   ^10And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath
   sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee
   out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

   ^11And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
   wickedness as this is among you.

   ^12If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the Lord thy God
   hath given thee to dwell there, saying,

   ^13Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you,
   and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and
   serve other gods, which ye have not known;

   ^14Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and,
   behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is
   wrought among you;

   ^15Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge
   of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the
   cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.

   ^16And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
   street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
   thereof every whit, for the Lord thy God: and it shall be an heap for
   ever; it shall not be built again.

   ^17And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
   that the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
   mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
   sworn unto thy fathers;

   ^18When thou shalt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
   all his commandments which I command thee this day, to do that which is
   right in the eyes of the Lord thy God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Ye are the children of the Lord your God: ye shall not cut yourselves,
   nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

   ^2For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath
   chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations
   that are upon the earth.

   ^3Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

   ^4These are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and the
   goat,

   ^5The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat,
   and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

   ^6And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into
   two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall eat.

   ^7Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or of
   them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and the
   coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore they
   are unclean unto you.

   ^8And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud,
   it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch
   their dead carcase.

   ^9These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have fins
   and scales shall ye eat:

   ^10And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it is
   unclean unto you.

   ^11Of all clean birds ye shall eat.

   ^12But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
   ossifrage, and the ospray,

   ^13And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,

   ^14And every raven after his kind,

   ^15And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
   his kind,

   ^16The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan,

   ^17And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant,

   ^18And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and
   the bat.

   ^19And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they shall
   not be eaten.

   ^20But of all clean fowls ye may eat.

   ^21Ye shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give
   it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou
   mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto the Lord
   thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

   ^22Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field
   bringeth forth year by year.

   ^23And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he
   shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
   wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
   flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always.

   ^24And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to
   carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the Lord thy God
   shall choose to set his name there, when the Lord thy God hath blessed
   thee:

   ^25Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up the money in thine
   hand, and shalt go unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose:

   ^26And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth
   after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for
   whatsoever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat there before the Lord
   thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household,

   ^27And the Levite that is within thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him;
   for he hath no part nor inheritance with thee.

   ^28At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of
   thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:

   ^29And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,)
   and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are within
   thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the Lord
   thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

   ^2And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that lendeth
   ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact it of his
   neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the Lord'S release.

   ^3Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is thine
   with thy brother thine hand shall release;

   ^4Save when there shall be no poor among you; for the Lord shall
   greatly bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for
   an inheritance to possess it:

   ^5Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
   observe to do all these commandments which I command thee this day.

   ^6For the Lord thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
   shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt
   reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

   ^7If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of
   thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt
   not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:

   ^8But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend
   him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

   ^9Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The
   seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil
   against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto
   the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

   ^10Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
   when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God
   shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine
   hand unto.

   ^11For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command
   thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy
   poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

   ^12And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto
   thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let
   him go free from thee.

   ^13And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him
   go away empty:

   ^14Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy
   floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God
   hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

   ^15And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
   Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee
   this thing to day.

   ^16And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee;
   because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with thee;

   ^17Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear unto the
   door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy
   maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

   ^18It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free
   from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee, in
   serving thee six years: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
   that thou doest.

   ^19All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou
   shalt sanctify unto the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work with the
   firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

   ^20Thou shalt eat it before the Lord thy God year by year in the place
   which the Lord shall choose, thou and thy household.

   ^21And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or
   have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the Lord thy
   God.

   ^22Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean person
   shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

   ^23Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it upon
   the ground as water.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God:
   for in the month of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of
   Egypt by night.

   ^2Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the Lord thy God, of
   the flock and the herd, in the place which the Lord shall choose to
   place his name there.

   ^3Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat
   unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
   camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest
   remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all
   the days of thy life.

   ^4And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coast
   seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou
   sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the morning.

   ^5Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates, which
   the Lord thy God giveth thee:

   ^6But at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his
   name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, at the going
   down of the sun, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.

   ^7And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the Lord thy God
   shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
   tents.

   ^8Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
   shall be a solemn assembly to the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work
   therein.

   ^9Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven
   weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn.

   ^10And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a
   tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give
   unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee:

   ^11And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son,
   and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the
   Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless,
   and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the Lord thy God
   hath chosen to place his name there.

   ^12And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou
   shalt observe and do these statutes.

   ^13Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that
   thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine:

   ^14And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy
   daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the
   stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

   ^15Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God in
   the place which the Lord shall choose: because the Lord thy God shall
   bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands,
   therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

   ^16Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy
   God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
   bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
   they shall not appear before the Lord empty:

   ^17Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the
   Lord thy God which he hath given thee.

   ^18Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the
   Lord thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge
   the people with just judgment.

   ^19Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
   neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
   pervert the words of the righteous.

   ^20That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest
   live, and inherit the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

   ^21Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar
   of the Lord thy God, which thou shalt make thee.

   ^22Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the Lord thy God
   hateth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God any bullock, or sheep,
   wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an abomination
   unto the Lord thy God.

   ^2If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the Lord
   thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness in the
   sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his covenant,

   ^3And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
   sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded;

   ^4And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and enquired
   diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain, that such
   abomination is wrought in Israel:

   ^5Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have
   committed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, even that man or that
   woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till they die.

   ^6At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is
   worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he
   shall not be put to death.

   ^7The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
   death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put the
   evil away from among you.

   ^8If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood
   and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being
   matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get
   thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose;

   ^9And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge
   that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew thee the
   sentence of judgment:

   ^10And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that
   place which the Lord shall choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt
   observe to do according to all that they inform thee:

   ^11According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee,
   and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shalt
   do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence which they shall shew
   thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

   ^12And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto
   the priest that standeth to minister there before the Lord thy God, or
   unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put away the
   evil from Israel.

   ^13And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
   presumptuously.

   ^14When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
   and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will
   set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;

   ^15Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God
   shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over
   thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
   brother.

   ^16But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to
   return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch
   as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that
   way.

   ^17Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
   away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.

   ^18And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
   that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
   is before the priests the Levites:

   ^19And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
   his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the
   words of this law and these statutes, to do them:

   ^20That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn
   not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left: to
   the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his
   children, in the midst of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part
   nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the Lord
   made by fire, and his inheritance.

   ^2Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the
   Lord is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

   ^3And this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them that
   offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give unto
   the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

   ^4The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and
   the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

   ^5For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand
   to minister in the name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever.

   ^6And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where
   he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the place
   which the Lord shall choose;

   ^7Then he shall minister in the name of the Lord his God, as all his
   brethren the Levites do, which stand there before the Lord.

   ^8They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the
   sale of his patrimony.

   ^9When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
   thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.

   ^10There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or
   his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an
   observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,

   ^11Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or
   a necromancer.

   ^12For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and
   because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from
   before thee.

   ^13Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.

   ^14For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
   observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the Lord thy
   God hath not suffered thee so to do.

   ^15The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
   thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;

   ^16According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in
   the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the
   Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I die
   not.

   ^17And the Lord said unto me, They have well spoken that which they
   have spoken.

   ^18I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto
   thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them
   all that I shall command him.

   ^19And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my
   words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.

   ^20But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
   which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
   name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

   ^21And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the
   Lord hath not spoken?

   ^22When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow
   not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not
   spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not
   be afraid of him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   When the Lord thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the Lord thy
   God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their
   cities, and in their houses;

   ^2Thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land,
   which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.

   ^3Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
   which the Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
   every slayer may flee thither.

   ^4And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither, that he
   may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not in
   time past;

   ^5As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and
   his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the
   head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he
   die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:

   ^6Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is
   hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him; whereas
   he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not in time past.

   ^7Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three cities
   for thee.

   ^8And if the Lord thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy
   fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto thy
   fathers;

   ^9If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do them, which I command
   thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his ways;
   then shalt thou add three cities more for thee, beside these three:

   ^10That innocent blood be not shed in thy land, which the Lord thy God
   giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be upon thee.

   ^11But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise
   up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one
   of these cities:

   ^12Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and
   deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.

   ^13Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of
   innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.

   ^14Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of old
   time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the
   land that the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.

   ^15One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for
   any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or
   at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established.

   ^16If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him
   that which is wrong;

   ^17Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand
   before the Lord, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in
   those days;

   ^18And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the
   witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against his
   brother;

   ^19Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his
   brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

   ^20And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth
   commit no more any such evil among you.

   ^21And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye for
   eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses,
   and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for
   the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of
   Egypt.

   ^2And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
   priest shall approach and speak unto the people,

   ^3And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto
   battle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and
   do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;

   ^4For the Lord your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you
   against your enemies, to save you.

   ^5And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is
   there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him
   go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
   dedicate it.

   ^6And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet
   eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in
   the battle, and another man eat of it.

   ^7And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken
   her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle,
   and another man take her.

   ^8And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall
   say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him go and
   return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well as his
   heart.

   ^9And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto
   the people, that they shall make captains of the armies to lead the
   people.

   ^10When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim
   peace unto it.

   ^11And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
   thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall
   be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

   ^12And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against
   thee, then thou shalt besiege it:

   ^13And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou
   shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword:

   ^14But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is
   in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself;
   and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God
   hath given thee.

   ^15Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from
   thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

   ^16But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give
   thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:

   ^17But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the
   Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
   Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee:

   ^18That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which
   they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the Lord your
   God.

   ^19When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it
   to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe
   against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them
   down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to employ them in the
   siege:

   ^20Only the trees which thou knowest that they be not trees for meat,
   thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks
   against the city that maketh war with thee, until it be subdued.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   If one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to
   possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him:

   ^2Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall
   measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain:

   ^3And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the slain man, even
   the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which hath not been
   wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke;

   ^4And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
   valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
   heifer's neck there in the valley:

   ^5And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the Lord
   thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of
   the Lord; and by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be
   tried:

   ^6And all the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man,
   shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley:

   ^7And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood,
   neither have our eyes seen it.

   ^8Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed,
   and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's charge. And the
   blood shall be forgiven them.

   ^9So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you,
   when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the Lord.

   ^10When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy
   God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
   captive,

   ^11And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire
   unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife;

   ^12Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave
   her head, and pare her nails;

   ^13And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and
   shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a
   full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her
   husband, and she shall be thy wife.

   ^14And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let
   her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money,
   thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her.

   ^15If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they
   have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the
   firstborn son be hers that was hated:

   ^16Then it shall be, when he maketh his sons to inherit that which he
   hath, that he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the
   son of the hated, which is indeed the firstborn:

   ^17But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the firstborn, by
   giving him a double portion of all that he hath: for he is the
   beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn is his.

   ^18If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the
   voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they
   have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:

   ^19Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him
   out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;

   ^20And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is
   stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton,
   and a drunkard.

   ^21And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
   die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall
   hear, and fear.

   ^22And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be
   put to death, and thou hang him on a tree:

   ^23His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in
   any wise bury him that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;)
   that thy land be not defiled, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an
   inheritance.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and hide
   thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy
   brother.

   ^2And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not,
   then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be with
   thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it to him
   again.

   ^3In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with
   his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he hath
   lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide
   thyself.

   ^4Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the way,
   and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up
   again.

   ^5The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither
   shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are
   abomination unto the Lord thy God.

   ^6If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or
   on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting
   upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam with the
   young:

   ^7But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to
   thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy
   days.

   ^8When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for
   thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall
   from thence.

   ^9Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit of
   thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be
   defiled.

   ^10Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

   ^11Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and
   linen together.

   ^12Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture,
   wherewith thou coverest thyself.

   ^13If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,

   ^14And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
   upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found
   her not a maid:

   ^15Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring
   forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto the elders of the city
   in the gate:

   ^16And the damsel's father shall say unto the elders, I gave my
   daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;

   ^17And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech against her, saying, I
   found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these are the tokens of my
   daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the cloth before the elders
   of the city.

   ^18And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him;

   ^19And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give
   them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil
   name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put
   her away all his days.

   ^20But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found
   for the damsel:

   ^21Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father's
   house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she
   die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her
   father's house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you.

   ^22If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
   they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
   the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.

   ^23If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man
   find her in the city, and lie with her;

   ^24Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye
   shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she
   cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his
   neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.

   ^25But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force
   her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:

   ^26But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the damsel no
   sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour,
   and slayeth him, even so is this matter:

   ^27For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and
   there was none to save her.

   ^28If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and
   lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;

   ^29Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father
   fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath
   humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.

   ^30A man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his father's
   skirt.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off,
   shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.

   ^2A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to
   his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the
   Lord.

   ^3An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the
   Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
   congregation of the Lord for ever:

   ^4Because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when
   ye came forth out of Egypt; and because they hired against thee Balaam
   the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.

   ^5Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the
   Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the
   Lord thy God loved thee.

   ^6Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days for
   ever.

   ^7Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou shalt
   not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

   ^8The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
   congregation of the Lord in their third generation.

   ^9When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from
   every wicked thing.

   ^10If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of
   uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
   the camp, he shall not come within the camp:

   ^11But it shall be, when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with
   water: and when the sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

   ^12Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go
   forth abroad:

   ^13And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when
   thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn
   back and cover that which cometh from thee:

   ^14For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver
   thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy
   camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from
   thee.

   ^15Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped
   from his master unto thee:

   ^16He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he
   shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt
   not oppress him.

   ^17There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite
   of the sons of Israel.

   ^18Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
   into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow: for even both these are
   abomination unto the Lord thy God.

   ^19Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury
   of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury:

   ^20Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother
   thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
   all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
   possess it.

   ^21When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not
   slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee;
   and it would be sin in thee.

   ^22But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

   ^23That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform; even
   a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy
   God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

   ^24When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest eat
   grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in
   thy vessel.

   ^25When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou
   mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle
   unto thy neighbour's standing corn.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that
   she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness
   in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in
   her hand, and send her out of his house.

   ^2And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another
   man's wife.

   ^3And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
   divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
   house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;

   ^4Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be
   his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination before the
   Lord: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God
   giveth thee for an inheritance.

   ^5When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither
   shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one
   year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

   ^6No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he
   taketh a man's life to pledge.

   ^7If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
   Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
   shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

   ^8Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and
   do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you: as I
   commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

   ^9Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that
   ye were come forth out of Egypt.

   ^10When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into
   his house to fetch his pledge.

   ^11Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall
   bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

   ^12And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:

   ^13In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
   goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and
   it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God.

   ^14Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
   whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land
   within thy gates:

   ^15At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go
   down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he
   cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

   ^16The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
   shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be
   put to death for his own sin.

   ^17Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
   fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge:

   ^18But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the
   Lord thy God redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this
   thing.

   ^19When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a
   sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be
   for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the Lord
   thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

   ^20When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
   boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for
   the widow.

   ^21When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean
   it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for
   the widow.

   ^22And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
   Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment,
   that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous,
   and condemn the wicked.

   ^2And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the
   judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
   according to his fault, by a certain number.

   ^3Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
   exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother
   should seem vile unto thee.

   ^4Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

   ^5If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child,
   the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her
   husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife,
   and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

   ^6And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed
   in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out
   of Israel.

   ^7And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his
   brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's
   brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will
   not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

   ^8Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and
   if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her;

   ^9Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the
   elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and
   shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not
   build up his brother's house.

   ^10And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath
   his shoe loosed.

   ^11When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one
   draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that
   smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets:

   ^12Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.

   ^13Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.

   ^14Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a
   small.

   ^15But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just
   measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land
   which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

   ^16For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an
   abomination unto the Lord thy God.

   ^17Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
   forth out of Egypt;

   ^18How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all
   that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he
   feared not God.

   ^19Therefore it shall be, when the Lord thy God hath given thee rest
   from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God
   giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt blot out
   the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not forget it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the Lord thy
   God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest
   therein;

   ^2That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth,
   which thou shalt bring of thy land that the Lord thy God giveth thee,
   and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the
   Lord thy God shall choose to place his name there.

   ^3And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days, and
   say unto him, I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come
   unto the country which the Lord sware unto our fathers for to give us.

   ^4And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it
   down before the altar of the Lord thy God.

   ^5And thou shalt speak and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian ready
   to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned
   there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and
   populous:

   ^6And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon
   us hard bondage:

   ^7And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord heard
   our voice, and looked on our affliction, and our labour, and our
   oppression:

   ^8And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and
   with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs,
   and with wonders:

   ^9And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land,
   even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

   ^10And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which
   thou, O Lord, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy
   God, and worship before the Lord thy God:

   ^11And thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God
   hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and
   the stranger that is among you.

   ^12When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
   increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
   it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
   they may eat within thy gates, and be filled;

   ^13Then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the
   hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the
   Levite, and unto the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow,
   according to all thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have
   not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them:

   ^14I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away
   ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the
   dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, and have
   done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

   ^15Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
   people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
   unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

   ^16This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes
   and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine
   heart, and with all thy soul.

   ^17Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in
   his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
   judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:

   ^18And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people,
   as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his
   commandments;

   ^19And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in
   praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy
   people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep
   all the commandments which I command you this day.

   ^2And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the
   land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up
   great stones, and plaister them with plaister:

   ^3And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou
   art passed over, that thou mayest go in unto the land which the Lord
   thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the
   Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee.

   ^4Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set
   up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou
   shalt plaister them with plaister.

   ^5And there shalt thou build an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar
   of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

   ^6Thou shalt build the altar of the Lord thy God of whole stones: and
   thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God:

   ^7And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
   rejoice before the Lord thy God.

   ^8And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very
   plainly.

   ^9And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel, saying,
   Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people
   of the Lord thy God.

   ^10Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his
   commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.

   ^11And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,

   ^12These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye
   are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and
   Joseph, and Benjamin:

   ^13And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and
   Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

   ^14And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with
   a loud voice,

   ^15Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an
   abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and
   putteth it in a secret place. And all the people shall answer and say,
   Amen.

   ^16Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all
   the people shall say, Amen.

   ^17Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. And all the
   people shall say, Amen.

   ^18Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And all
   the people shall say, Amen.

   ^19Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
   fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.

   ^20Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife; because he
   uncovereth his father's skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.

   ^21Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the people
   shall say, Amen.

   ^22Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father,
   or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.

   ^23Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the people
   shall say, Amen.

   ^24Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the people
   shall say, Amen.

   ^25Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And all
   the people shall say, Amen.

   ^26Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
   them. And all the people shall say, Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the
   voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments
   which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on
   high above all nations of the earth:

   ^2And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if
   thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God.

   ^3Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the
   field.

   ^4Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground,
   and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
   of thy sheep.

   ^5Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.

   ^6Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be
   when thou goest out.

   ^7The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be
   smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and
   flee before thee seven ways.

   ^8The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and
   in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in
   the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

   ^9The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath
   sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy
   God, and walk in his ways.

   ^10And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the
   name of the Lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.

   ^11And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy
   body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground,
   in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers to give thee.

   ^12The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give
   the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of
   thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not
   borrow.

   ^13And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and thou
   shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
   hearken unto the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I command thee
   this day, to observe and to do them:

   ^14And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command
   thee this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other
   gods to serve them.

   ^15But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice
   of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his
   statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall
   come upon thee, and overtake thee:

   ^16Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the
   field.

   ^17Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.

   ^18Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land,
   the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

   ^19Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be
   when thou goest out.

   ^20The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all
   that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed,
   and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings,
   whereby thou hast forsaken me.

   ^21The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have
   consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.

   ^22The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and
   with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword,
   and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until
   thou perish.

   ^23And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth
   that is under thee shall be iron.

   ^24The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from
   heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

   ^25The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou
   shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and
   shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

   ^26And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto
   the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

   ^27The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the
   emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not
   be healed.

   ^28The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
   astonishment of heart:

   ^29And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness,
   and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only
   oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.

   ^30Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou
   shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt
   plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.

   ^31Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat
   thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face,
   and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto thine
   enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

   ^32Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and
   thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long:
   and there shall be no might in thine hand.

   ^33The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which
   thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed
   alway:

   ^34So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou
   shalt see.

   ^35The Lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore
   botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of
   thy head.

   ^36The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over
   thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and
   there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

   ^37And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
   among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee.

   ^38Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather but
   little in; for the locust shall consume it.

   ^39Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither drink
   of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat them.

   ^40Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou
   shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his
   fruit.

   ^41Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them;
   for they shall go into captivity.

   ^42All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

   ^43The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high;
   and thou shalt come down very low.

   ^44He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be
   the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

   ^45Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
   thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou
   hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his
   commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:

   ^46And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon
   thy seed for ever.

   ^47Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with
   gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;

   ^48Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send
   against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
   of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he
   have destroyed thee.

   ^49The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of
   the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou
   shalt not understand;

   ^50A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of
   the old, nor shew favour to the young:

   ^51And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land,
   until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either corn,
   wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep,
   until he have destroyed thee.

   ^52And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
   fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
   land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy
   land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee.

   ^53And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
   sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in
   the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
   distress thee:

   ^54So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye
   shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and
   toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave:

   ^55So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children
   whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and
   in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all
   thy gates.

   ^56The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure
   to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and
   tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and
   toward her son, and toward her daughter,

   ^57And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and
   toward her children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for
   want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith
   thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

   ^58If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are
   written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful
   name, THE Lord THY GOD;

   ^59Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of
   thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore
   sicknesses, and of long continuance.

   ^60Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which
   thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.

   ^61Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the
   book of this law, them will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be
   destroyed.

   ^62And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of
   heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the
   Lord thy God.

   ^63And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do
   you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will rejoice over you to
   destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from
   off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

   ^64And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end
   of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other
   gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and
   stone.

   ^65And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the
   sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a
   trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind:

   ^66And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear
   day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life:

   ^67In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even
   thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart
   wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou
   shalt see.

   ^68And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the
   way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again: and
   there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and
   no man shall buy you.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   These are the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to
   make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the
   covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

   ^2And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have seen
   all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto
   Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land;

   ^3The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and
   those great miracles:

   ^4Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to
   see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

   ^5And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are
   not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot.

   ^6Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink:
   that ye might know that I am the Lord your God.

   ^7And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og
   the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote them:

   ^8And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the
   Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.

   ^9Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may
   prosper in all that ye do.

   ^10Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God; your captains
   of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the men of
   Israel,

   ^11Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp,
   from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water:

   ^12That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and
   into his oath, which the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day:

   ^13That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and
   that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he
   hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

   ^14Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;

   ^15But with him that standeth here with us this day before the Lord our
   God, and also with him that is not here with us this day:

   ^16(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came
   through the nations which ye passed by;

   ^17And ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and
   stone, silver and gold, which were among them:)

   ^18Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe,
   whose heart turneth away this day from the Lord our God, to go and
   serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a root
   that beareth gall and wormwood;

   ^19And it come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that
   he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
   walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:

   ^20The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
   jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
   written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
   his name from under heaven.

   ^21And the Lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of
   Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in
   this book of the law:

   ^22So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up
   after you, and the stranger that shall come from a far land, shall say,
   when they see the plagues of that land, and the sicknesses which the
   Lord hath laid upon it;

   ^23And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
   that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
   the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the Lord
   overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:

   ^24Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto
   this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?

   ^25Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the
   Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them
   forth out of the land of Egypt:

   ^26For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom
   they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them:

   ^27And the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring
   upon it all the curses that are written in this book:

   ^28And the Lord rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath,
   and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as it is
   this day.

   ^29The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things
   which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we
   may do all the words of this law.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee,
   the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou
   shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the Lord thy God
   hath driven thee,

   ^2And shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and shalt obey his voice
   according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children,
   with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;

   ^3That then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have
   compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the
   nations, whither the Lord thy God hath scattered thee.

   ^4If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from
   thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch
   thee:

   ^5And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers
   possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and
   multiply thee above thy fathers.

   ^6And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
   thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all
   thy soul, that thou mayest live.

   ^7And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies,
   and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

   ^8And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his
   commandments which I command thee this day.

   ^9And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine
   hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in
   the fruit of thy land, for good: for the Lord will again rejoice over
   thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers:

   ^10If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
   his commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the
   law, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and
   with all thy soul.

   ^11For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden
   from thee, neither is it far off.

   ^12It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us
   to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?

   ^13Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go
   over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
   it?

   ^14But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
   that thou mayest do it.

   ^15See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and
   evil;

   ^16In that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in
   his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his
   judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the Lord thy God
   shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.

   ^17But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt
   be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them;

   ^18I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that
   ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over
   Jordan to go to possess it.

   ^19I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have
   set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose
   life, that both thou and thy seed may live:

   ^20That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey
   his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life,
   and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which
   the Lord sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to
   give them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.

   ^2And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this day;
   I can no more go out and come in: also the Lord hath said unto me, Thou
   shalt not go over this Jordan.

   ^3The Lord thy God, he will go over before thee, and he will destroy
   these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them: and
   Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the Lord hath said.

   ^4And the Lord shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings
   of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

   ^5And the Lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do unto
   them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded you.

   ^6Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for
   the Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not fail
   thee, nor forsake thee.

   ^7And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all
   Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with this
   people unto the land which the Lord hath sworn unto their fathers to
   give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

   ^8And the Lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
   thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither be
   dismayed.

   ^9And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons
   of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and unto all
   the elders of Israel.

   ^10And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years,
   in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,

   ^11When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God in the
   place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel
   in their hearing.

   ^12Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy
   stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
   may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words
   of this law:

   ^13And that their children, which have not known any thing, may hear,
   and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land
   whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

   ^14And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou
   must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the
   congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went,
   and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^15And the Lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and
   the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

   ^16And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
   fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
   of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
   will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.

   ^17Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will
   forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be
   devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that they
   will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God
   is not among us?

   ^18And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils which
   they shall have wrought, in that they are turned unto other gods.

   ^19Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children
   of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for
   me against the children of Israel.

   ^20For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware unto
   their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall have
   eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn unto
   other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my covenant.

   ^21And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are befallen
   them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness; for it
   shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I know
   their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have brought
   them into the land which I sware.

   ^22Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
   children of Israel.

   ^23And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong and
   of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the
   land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.

   ^24And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words
   of this law in a book, until they were finished,

   ^25That Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant
   of the Lord, saying,

   ^26Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the
   covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a witness
   against thee.

   ^27For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet
   alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and
   how much more after my death?

   ^28Gather unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers,
   that I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth
   to record against them.

   ^29For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves,
   and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you; and evil will
   befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil in the sight of
   the Lord, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.

   ^30And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the
   words of this song, until they were ended.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words
   of my mouth.

   ^2My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
   dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
   the grass:

   ^3Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness
   unto our God.

   ^4He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a
   God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

   ^5They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
   children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.

   ^6Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? is not he
   thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
   established thee?

   ^7Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask
   thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

   ^8When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
   separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according
   to the number of the children of Israel.

   ^9For the Lord'S portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his
   inheritance.

   ^10He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness;
   he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his
   eye.

   ^11As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
   spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:

   ^12So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with
   him.

   ^13He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat
   the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the
   rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;

   ^14Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of
   the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and
   thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.

   ^15But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
   grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which
   made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.

   ^16They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations
   provoked they him to anger.

   ^17They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not,
   to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

   ^18Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten
   God that formed thee.

   ^19And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking
   of his sons, and of his daughters.

   ^20And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their
   end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom
   is no faith.

   ^21They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have
   provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
   jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to
   anger with a foolish nation.

   ^22For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest
   hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire
   the foundations of the mountains.

   ^23I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.

   ^24They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and
   with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon
   them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.

   ^25The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young
   man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.

   ^26I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
   remembrance of them to cease from among men:

   ^27Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their
   adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should
   say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this.

   ^28For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
   understanding in them.

   ^29O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
   consider their latter end!

   ^30How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight,
   except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?

   ^31For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being
   judges.

   ^32For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
   Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:

   ^33Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.

   ^34Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
   treasures?

   ^35To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in
   due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that
   shall come upon them make haste.

   ^36For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
   servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
   shut up, or left.

   ^37And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they
   trusted,

   ^38Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of
   their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your
   protection.

   ^39See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill,
   and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can
   deliver out of my hand.

   ^40For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

   ^41If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment;
   I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate
   me.

   ^42I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour
   flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from
   the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

   ^43Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood
   of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will
   be merciful unto his land, and to his people.

   ^44And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of
   the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.

   ^45And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:

   ^46And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I
   testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
   observe to do, all the words of this law.

   ^47For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
   through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
   go over Jordan to possess it.

   ^48And the Lord spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying,

   ^49Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in
   the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
   Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:

   ^50And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy
   people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto
   his people:

   ^51Because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the
   waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye
   sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel.

   ^52Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
   thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the
   children of Israel before his death.

   ^2And he said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
   them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands
   of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

   ^3Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and they
   sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

   ^4Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of
   Jacob.

   ^5And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
   tribes of Israel were gathered together.

   ^6Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.

   ^7And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, Lord, the voice
   of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient
   for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.

   ^8And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy
   one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive
   at the waters of Meribah;

   ^9Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him;
   neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for
   they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.

   ^10They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall
   put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.

   ^11Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite
   through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
   him, that they rise not again.

   ^12And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in
   safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
   shall dwell between his shoulders.

   ^13And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the
   precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
   beneath,

   ^14And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the
   precious things put forth by the moon,

   ^15And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the
   precious things of the lasting hills,

   ^16And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and
   for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come
   upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was
   separated from his brethren.

   ^17His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are
   like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together
   to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim,
   and they are the thousands of Manasseh.

   ^18And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and,
   Issachar, in thy tents.

   ^19They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer
   sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of
   the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.

   ^20And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as
   a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

   ^21And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a
   portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of
   the people, he executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgments with
   Israel.

   ^22And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from
   Bashan.

   ^23And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full
   with the blessing of the Lord: possess thou the west and the south.

   ^24And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be
   acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

   ^25Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
   strength be.

   ^26There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
   heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

   ^27The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting
   arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall
   say, Destroy them.

   ^28Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob shall
   be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.

   ^29Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by
   the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
   excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
   shalt tread upon their high places.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to
   the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the Lord shewed
   him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan,

   ^2And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the
   land of Judah, unto the utmost sea,

   ^3And the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of
   palm trees, unto Zoar.

   ^4And the Lord said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto
   Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
   seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
   go over thither.

   ^5So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab,
   according to the word of the Lord.

   ^6And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against
   Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

   ^7And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye
   was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

   ^8And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab
   thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

   ^9And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses
   had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto
   him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^10And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom
   the Lord knew face to face,

   ^11In all the signs and the wonders, which the Lord sent him to do in
   the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his
   land,

   ^12And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses
   shewed in the sight of all Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Joshua
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass,
   that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister,
   saying,

   ^2Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan,
   thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even
   to the children of Israel.

   ^3Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I
   given unto you, as I said unto Moses.

   ^4From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the
   river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea
   toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.

   ^5There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of
   thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail
   thee, nor forsake thee.

   ^6Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
   divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to
   give them.

   ^7Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to
   do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee:
   turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
   prosper whithersoever thou goest.

   ^8This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
   shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
   according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
   way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

   ^9Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not
   afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee
   whithersoever thou goest.

   ^10Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,

   ^11Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you
   victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go
   in to possess the land, which the Lord your God giveth you to possess
   it.

   ^12And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of
   Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying,

   ^13Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
   saying, The Lord your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this
   land.

   ^14Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the
   land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before
   your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help them;

   ^15Until the Lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you,
   and they also have possessed the land which the Lord your God giveth
   them: then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy
   it, which Moses the Lord'S servant gave you on this side Jordan toward
   the sunrising.

   ^16And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we
   will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

   ^17According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we
   hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with
   Moses.

   ^18Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
   not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be
   put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly,
   saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an
   harlot's house, named Rahab, and lodged there.

   ^2And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men
   in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country.

   ^3And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men
   that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for they be
   come to search out all the country.

   ^4And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There
   came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were:

   ^5And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it
   was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue
   after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.

   ^6But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
   with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.

   ^7And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and
   as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the
   gate.

   ^8And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;

   ^9And she said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the
   land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
   inhabitants of the land faint because of you.

   ^10For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red sea for
   you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of
   the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye
   utterly destroyed.

   ^11And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
   neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
   for the Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.

   ^12Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have
   shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my father's
   house, and give me a true token:

   ^13And that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my
   brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives
   from death.

   ^14And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this
   our business. And it shall be, when the Lord hath given us the land,
   that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.

   ^15Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house
   was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.

   ^16And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers
   meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be
   returned: and afterward may ye go your way.

   ^17And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine oath
   which thou hast made us swear.

   ^18Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of
   scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
   shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
   father's household, home unto thee.

   ^19And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy
   house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be
   guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood
   shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.

   ^20And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine
   oath which thou hast made us to swear.

   ^21And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent them
   away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window.

   ^22And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
   days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
   throughout all the way, but found them not.

   ^23So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed
   over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all things that
   befell them:

   ^24And they said unto Joshua, Truly the Lord hath delivered into our
   hands all the land; for even all the inhabitants of the country do
   faint because of us.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim,
   and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there
   before they passed over.

   ^2And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through
   the host;

   ^3And they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the
   covenant of the Lord your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it,
   then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.

   ^4Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
   cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
   which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

   ^5And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow
   the Lord will do wonders among you.

   ^6And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the
   covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of
   the covenant, and went before the people.

   ^7And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee
   in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with
   Moses, so I will be with thee.

   ^8And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant,
   saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall
   stand still in Jordan.

   ^9And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear
   the words of the Lord your God.

   ^10And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among
   you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
   Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and
   the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.

   ^11Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth
   over before you into Jordan.

   ^12Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out
   of every tribe a man.

   ^13And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the
   priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, shall
   rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut
   off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand
   upon an heap.

   ^14And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to
   pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant
   before the people;

   ^15And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of
   the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water,
   (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)

   ^16That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an
   heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those
   that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed,
   and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.

   ^17And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood
   firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites
   passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over
   Jordan.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan,
   that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,

   ^2Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,

   ^3And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of
   Jordan, out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve
   stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the
   lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.

   ^4Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
   children of Israel, out of every tribe a man:

   ^5And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your
   God into the midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone
   upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the
   children of Israel:

   ^6That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
   fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones?

   ^7Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off
   before the ark of the covenant of the Lord; when it passed over Jordan,
   the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a
   memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.

   ^8And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up
   twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto
   Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
   Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
   lodged, and laid them down there.

   ^9And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place
   where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood:
   and they are there unto this day.

   ^10For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan,
   until every thing was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak
   unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the
   people hasted and passed over.

   ^11And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
   that the ark of the Lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence
   of the people.

   ^12And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the
   tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as
   Moses spake unto them:

   ^13About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the Lord
   unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.

   ^14On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel;
   and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.

   ^15And the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,

   ^16Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they
   come up out of Jordan.

   ^17Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of
   Jordan.

   ^18And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
   covenant of the Lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the
   soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
   waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
   banks, as they did before.

   ^19And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first
   month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.

   ^20And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua
   pitch in Gilgal.

   ^21And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children
   shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these
   stones?

   ^22Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this
   Jordan on dry land.

   ^23For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you,
   until ye were passed over, as the Lord your God did to the Red sea,
   which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over:

   ^24That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord,
   that it is mighty: that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which were on
   the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which
   were by the sea, heard that the Lord had dried up the waters of Jordan
   from before the children of Israel, until we were passed over, that
   their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because
   of the children of Israel.

   ^2At that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and
   circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.

   ^3And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
   Israel at the hill of the foreskins.

   ^4And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that
   came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died in
   the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.

   ^5Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people
   that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of
   Egypt, them they had not circumcised.

   ^6For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till
   all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt, were
   consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: unto whom the
   Lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the Lord sware
   unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk
   and honey.

   ^7And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua
   circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
   circumcised them by the way.

   ^8And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people,
   that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole.

   ^9And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
   reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is
   called Gilgal unto this day.

   ^10And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover
   on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.

   ^11And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the
   passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.

   ^12And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old
   corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more;
   but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.

   ^13And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up
   his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him
   with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said
   unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?

   ^14And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now
   come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and
   said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?

   ^15And the captain of the Lord'S host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe
   from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And
   Joshua did so.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel:
   none went out, and none came in.

   ^2And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand
   Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.

   ^3And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round about
   the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.

   ^4And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams'
   horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and
   the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

   ^5And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the
   ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people
   shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall
   down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before
   him.

   ^6And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them,
   Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
   trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the Lord.

   ^7And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let
   him that is armed pass on before the ark of the Lord.

   ^8And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the
   seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
   before the Lord, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
   covenant of the Lord followed them.

   ^9And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
   trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
   and blowing with the trumpets.

   ^10And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor
   make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out of
   your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

   ^11So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going about it once: and
   they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.

   ^12And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
   ark of the Lord.

   ^13And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before the
   ark of the Lord went on continually, and blew with the trumpets: and
   the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of
   the Lord, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

   ^14And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into
   the camp: so they did six days.

   ^15And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about
   the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner
   seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.

   ^16And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with
   the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the Lord hath
   given you the city.

   ^17And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are therein,
   to the Lord: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are
   with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.

   ^18And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye
   make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make
   the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.

   ^19But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
   consecrated unto the Lord: they shall come into the treasury of the
   Lord.

   ^20So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and
   it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and
   the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so
   that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him,
   and they took the city.

   ^21And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
   woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
   sword.

   ^22But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country,
   Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman, and all
   that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

   ^23And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab,
   and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had;
   and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp of
   Israel.

   ^24And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
   the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they
   put into the treasury of the house of the Lord.

   ^25And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household,
   and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day;
   because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

   ^26And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man
   before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he
   shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
   son shall he set up the gates of it.

   ^27So the Lord was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all
   the country.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing:
   for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the
   tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the Lord
   was kindled against the children of Israel.

   ^2And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven, on
   the east side of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view
   the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai.

   ^3And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the
   people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
   Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
   few.

   ^4So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men: and
   they fled before the men of Ai.

   ^5And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
   chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in
   the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
   as water.

   ^6And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
   before the ark of the Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of
   Israel, and put dust upon their heads.

   ^7And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord GOD, wherefore hast thou at all brought
   this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites,
   to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the other
   side Jordan!

   ^8O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before
   their enemies!

   ^9For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of
   it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth:
   and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?

   ^10And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou
   thus upon thy face?

   ^11Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant
   which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing,
   and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even
   among their own stuff.

   ^12Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
   enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were
   accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the
   accursed from among you.

   ^13Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to
   morrow: for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed
   thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine
   enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

   ^14In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
   tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the Lord taketh shall
   come according to the families thereof; and the family which the Lord
   shall take shall come by households; and the household which the Lord
   shall take shall come man by man.

   ^15And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall
   be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
   transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and because he hath wrought
   folly in Israel.

   ^16So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their
   tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken:

   ^17And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the
   Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and
   Zabdi was taken:

   ^18And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of
   Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was
   taken.

   ^19And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the
   Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what
   thou hast done; hide it not from me.

   ^20And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against
   the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done:

   ^21When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two
   hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight,
   then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the
   earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

   ^22So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold,
   it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

   ^23And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
   unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out
   before the Lord.

   ^24And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah,
   and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
   and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
   tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
   Achor.

   ^25And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble
   thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them
   with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.

   ^26And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So
   the Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of
   that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take
   all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I have
   given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and
   his land:

   ^2And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and
   her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take
   for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.

   ^3So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and
   Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them
   away by night.

   ^4And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against
   the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be
   ye all ready:

   ^5And I, and all the people that are with me, will approach unto the
   city: and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at
   the first, that we will flee before them,

   ^6(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
   city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first:
   therefore we will flee before them.

   ^7Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for
   the Lord your God will deliver it into your hand.

   ^8And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set the
   city on fire: according to the commandment of the Lord shall ye do.
   See, I have commanded you.

   ^9Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and
   abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged
   that night among the people.

   ^10And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
   and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.

   ^11And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, went
   up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north
   side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.

   ^12And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush
   between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.

   ^13And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on the
   north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city,
   Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

   ^14And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted
   and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to
   battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
   but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
   city.

   ^15And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them,
   and fled by the way of the wilderness.

   ^16And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue
   after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the
   city.

   ^17And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out
   after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.

   ^18And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thy
   hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua
   stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.

   ^19And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
   soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
   and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.

   ^20And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
   the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
   flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
   turned back upon the pursuers.

   ^21And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the
   city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
   and slew the men of Ai.

   ^22And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were in
   the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and they
   smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

   ^23And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.

   ^24And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the
   inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased
   them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword, until
   they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote
   it with the edge of the sword.

   ^25And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women,
   were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.

   ^26For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
   spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.

   ^27Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey
   unto themselves, according unto the word of the Lord which he commanded
   Joshua.

   ^28And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation
   unto this day.

   ^29And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon
   as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase
   down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the
   city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto
   this day.

   ^30Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount
   Ebal,

   ^31As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel,
   as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole
   stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they offered
   thereon burnt offerings unto the Lord, and sacrificed peace offerings.

   ^32And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which
   he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.

   ^33And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
   stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the
   Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, as well the
   stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
   mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the
   servant of the Lord had commanded before, that they should bless the
   people of Israel.

   ^34And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
   cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

   ^35There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read
   not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the
   little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan,
   in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great
   sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite,
   the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;

   ^2That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with
   Israel, with one accord.

   ^3And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
   Jericho and to Ai,

   ^4They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been
   ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles,
   old, and rent, and bound up;

   ^5And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon
   them; and all the bread of their provision was dry and mouldy.

   ^6And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him,
   and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore
   make ye a league with us.

   ^7And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell
   among us; and how shall we make a league with you?

   ^8And they said unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto
   them, Who are ye? and from whence come ye?

   ^9And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come
   because of the name of the Lord thy God: for we have heard the fame of
   him, and all that he did in Egypt,

   ^10And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were
   beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan,
   which was at Ashtaroth.

   ^11Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to
   us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
   them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a
   league with us.

   ^12This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
   the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
   it is mouldy:

   ^13And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were new; and, behold,
   they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes are become old by
   reason of the very long journey.

   ^14And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
   mouth of the Lord.

   ^15And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let
   them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.

   ^16And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a
   league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours, and
   that they dwelt among them.

   ^17And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on
   the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and
   Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.

   ^18And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of
   the congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. And all
   the congregation murmured against the princes.

   ^19But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn
   unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch
   them.

   ^20This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be
   upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

   ^21And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be
   hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
   princes had promised them.

   ^22And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
   Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when
   ye dwell among us?

   ^23Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed
   from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the
   house of my God.

   ^24And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told
   thy servants, how that the Lord thy God commanded his servant Moses to
   give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
   from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
   you, and have done this thing.

   ^25And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and right
   unto thee to do unto us, do.

   ^26And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the
   children of Israel, that they slew them not.

   ^27And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
   for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto this
   day, in the place which he should choose.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now it came to pass, when Adonizedek king of Jerusalem had heard how
   Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to
   Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the
   inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them;

   ^2That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of
   the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men
   thereof were mighty.

   ^3Wherefore Adonizedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of
   Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of
   Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,

   ^4Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath
   made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.

   ^5Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the
   king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of
   Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their
   hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.

   ^6And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying,
   Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save
   us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the
   mountains are gathered together against us.

   ^7So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with
   him, and all the mighty men of valour.

   ^8And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered
   them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.

   ^9Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all
   night.

   ^10And the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a
   great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up
   to Bethhoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.

   ^11And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in
   the going down to Bethhoron, that the Lord cast down great stones from
   heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which died
   with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the
   sword.

   ^12Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up
   the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of
   Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the
   valley of Ajalon.

   ^13And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had
   avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book
   of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted
   not to go down about a whole day.

   ^14And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord
   hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.

   ^15And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
   Gilgal.

   ^16But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.

   ^17And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a
   cave at Makkedah.

   ^18And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and
   set men by it for to keep them:

   ^19And stay ye not, but pursue after your enemies, and smite the
   hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the
   Lord your God hath delivered them into your hand.

   ^20And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made
   an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were
   consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced
   cities.

   ^21And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in
   peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.

   ^22Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those
   five kings unto me out of the cave.

   ^23And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of
   the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
   Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.

   ^24And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua,
   that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the
   captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your
   feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their
   feet upon the necks of them.

   ^25And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and
   of good courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against
   whom ye fight.

   ^26And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on
   five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.

   ^27And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that
   Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them
   into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the
   cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.

   ^28And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the
   sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the
   souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of
   Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.

   ^29Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto
   Libnah, and fought against Libnah:

   ^30And the Lord delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand
   of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the
   souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the
   king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.

   ^31And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
   Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it:

   ^32And the Lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took
   it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all
   the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to
   Libnah.

   ^33Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote
   him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

   ^34And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him;
   and they encamped against it, and fought against it:

   ^35And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the
   sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that
   day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.

   ^36And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron;
   and they fought against it:

   ^37And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the
   king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were
   therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to
   Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.

   ^38And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought
   against it:

   ^39And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof;
   and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed
   all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done
   to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done
   also to Libnah, and to her king.

   ^40So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and
   of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
   remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lord God of
   Israel commanded.

   ^41And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all the
   country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.

   ^42And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time,
   because the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.

   ^43And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
   Gilgal.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things,
   that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to
   the king of Achshaph,

   ^2And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the
   plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of
   Dor on the west,

   ^3And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite,
   and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains,
   and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.

   ^4And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people,
   even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses
   and chariots very many.

   ^5And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
   together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.

   ^6And the Lord said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to
   morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel:
   thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.

   ^7So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by
   the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

   ^8And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them,
   and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the
   valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them
   none remaining.

   ^9And Joshua did unto them as the Lord bade him: he houghed their
   horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

   ^10And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the
   king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all
   those kingdoms.

   ^11And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the
   sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe: and
   he burnt Hazor with fire.

   ^12And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did
   Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly
   destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.

   ^13But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel
   burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.

   ^14And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of
   Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with
   the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they
   any to breathe.

   ^15As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command
   Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the Lord
   commanded Moses.

   ^16So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country,
   and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain, and the
   mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;

   ^17Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad
   in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he
   took, and smote them, and slew them.

   ^18Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

   ^19There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel,
   save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in
   battle.

   ^20For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come
   against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that
   they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the Lord
   commanded Moses.

   ^21And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the
   mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the
   mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua
   destroyed them utterly with their cities.

   ^22There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of
   Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.

   ^23So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the Lord said
   unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according
   to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel
   smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the
   rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the
   plain on the east:

   ^2Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from
   Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle
   of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which
   is the border of the children of Ammon;

   ^3And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the
   sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
   Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah:

   ^4And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the
   giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,

   ^5And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto
   the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the
   border of Sihon king of Heshbon.

   ^6Them did Moses the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel
   smite: and Moses the servant of the Lord gave it for a possession unto
   the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.

   ^7And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children
   of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad in the
   valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir;
   which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession according
   to their divisions;

   ^8In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the
   springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites,
   the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
   Jebusites:

   ^9The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel,
   one;

   ^10The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;

   ^11The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;

   ^12The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;

   ^13The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;

   ^14The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;

   ^15The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;

   ^16The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;

   ^17The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;

   ^18The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;

   ^19The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;

   ^20The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;

   ^21The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;

   ^22The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;

   ^23The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of
   Gilgal, one;

   ^24The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the Lord said unto him,
   Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much
   land to be possessed.

   ^2This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
   Philistines, and all Geshuri,

   ^3From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron
   northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the
   Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the
   Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:

   ^4From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that is
   beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:

   ^5And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising,
   from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.

   ^6All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
   Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from
   before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
   Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.

   ^7Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
   tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh,

   ^8With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their
   inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as
   Moses the servant of the Lord gave them;

   ^9From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city
   that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto
   Dibon;

   ^10And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in
   Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;

   ^11And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and
   all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;

   ^12All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in
   Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses
   smite, and cast them out.

   ^13Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor
   the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among
   the Israelites until this day.

   ^14Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices
   of the Lord God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he
   said unto them.

   ^15And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance
   according to their families.

   ^16And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river
   Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
   plain by Medeba;

   ^17Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and
   Bamothbaal, and Beth-Baalmeon,

   ^18And Jahaza, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,

   ^19And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the
   valley,

   ^20And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth,

   ^21And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king
   of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the
   princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which
   were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.

   ^22Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
   Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

   ^23And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border
   thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their
   families, the cities and the villages thereof.

   ^24And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the
   children of Gad according to their families.

   ^25And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half
   the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;

   ^26And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim
   unto the border of Debir;

   ^27And in the valley, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and
   Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and
   his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other
   side Jordan eastward.

   ^28This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families,
   the cities, and their villages.

   ^29And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this
   was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by
   their families.

   ^30And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og
   king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan,
   threescore cities:

   ^31And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
   Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of
   Manasseh, even to the one half of the children of Machir by their
   families.

   ^32These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance
   in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.

   ^33But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the Lord
   God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in
   the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of
   Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of
   Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

   ^2By lot was their inheritance, as the Lord commanded by the hand of
   Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

   ^3For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe
   on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance
   among them.

   ^4For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim:
   therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities
   to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
   substance.

   ^5As the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they
   divided the land.

   ^6Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the
   son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing
   that the Lord said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in
   Kadeshbarnea.

   ^7Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from
   Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it
   was in mine heart.

   ^8Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the
   people melt: but I wholly followed the Lord my God.

   ^9And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet
   have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever,
   because thou hast wholly followed the Lord my God.

   ^10And now, behold, the Lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these
   forty and five years, even since the Lord spake this word unto Moses,
   while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo, I
   am this day fourscore and five years old.

   ^11As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent
   me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both
   to go out, and to come in.

   ^12Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the Lord spake in that
   day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that
   the cities were great and fenced: if so be the Lord will be with me,
   then I shall be able to drive them out, as the Lord said.

   ^13And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh
   Hebron for an inheritance.

   ^14Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of
   Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
   the Lord God of Israel.

   ^15And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a
   great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their
   families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward
   was the uttermost part of the south coast.

   ^2And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the
   bay that looketh southward:

   ^3And it went out to the south side to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along
   to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed
   along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:

   ^4From thence it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of
   Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be
   your south coast.

   ^5And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan.
   And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at
   the uttermost part of Jordan:

   ^6And the border went up to Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of
   Betharabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of
   Reuben:

   ^7And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so
   northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to
   Adummim, which is on the south side of the river: and the border passed
   toward the waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at
   Enrogel:

   ^8And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the
   south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went
   up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom
   westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:

   ^9And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain
   of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron;
   and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:

   ^10And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and
   passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the
   north side, and went down to Beth- shemesh, and passed on to Timnah:

   ^11And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the
   border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went
   out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.

   ^12And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.
   This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to
   their families.

   ^13And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the
   children of Judah, according to the commandment of the Lord to Joshua,
   even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.

   ^14And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman,
   and Talmai, the children of Anak.

   ^15And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of
   Debir before was Kirjath- sepher.

   ^16And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him
   will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

   ^17And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he
   gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

   ^18And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask
   of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said unto
   her, What wouldest thou?

   ^19Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south
   land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs,
   and the nether springs.

   ^20This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah
   according to their families.

   ^21And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
   toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,

   ^22And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,

   ^23And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,

   ^24Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,

   ^25And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor,

   ^26Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,

   ^27And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,

   ^28And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah,

   ^29Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,

   ^30And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,

   ^31And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,

   ^32And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are
   twenty and nine, with their villages:

   ^33And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,

   ^34And Zanoah, and En- gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,

   ^35Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,

   ^36And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen
   cities with their villages:

   ^37Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad,

   ^38And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,

   ^39Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,

   ^40And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,

   ^41And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities
   with their villages:

   ^42Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,

   ^43And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,

   ^44And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their
   villages:

   ^45Ekron, with her towns and her villages:

   ^46From Ekron even unto the sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their
   villages:

   ^47Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her
   villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border
   thereof:

   ^48And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,

   ^49And Dannah, and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir,

   ^50And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,

   ^51And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:

   ^52Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,

   ^53And Janum, and Bethtappuah, and Aphekah,

   ^54And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities
   with their villages:

   ^55Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,

   ^56And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,

   ^57Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:

   ^58Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor,

   ^59And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their
   villages:

   ^60Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with
   their villages:

   ^61In the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah,

   ^62And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their
   villages.

   ^63As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of
   Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the
   children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto
   the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from
   Jericho throughout mount Bethel,

   ^2And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders
   of Archi to Ataroth,

   ^3And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of
   Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at
   the sea.

   ^4So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their
   inheritance.

   ^5And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families
   was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was
   Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;

   ^6And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north
   side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed
   by it on the east to Janohah;

   ^7And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to
   Jericho, and went out at Jordan.

   ^8The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and
   the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the
   tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.

   ^9And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the
   inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their
   villages.

   ^10And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the
   Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under
   tribute.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the
   firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the
   father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead
   and Bashan.

   ^2There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by
   their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of
   Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem,
   and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these
   were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.

   ^3But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of
   Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
   the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and
   Tirzah.

   ^4And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the
   son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The Lord commanded Moses to
   give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore according to the
   commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance among the brethren
   of their father.

   ^5And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead
   and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan;

   ^6Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons:
   and the rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead.

   ^7And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth
   before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the
   inhabitants of Entappuah.

   ^8Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of
   Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim;

   ^9And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river:
   these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of
   Manasseh also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of
   it were at the sea:

   ^10Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the
   sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in
   Issachar on the east.

   ^11And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her towns,
   and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and
   the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach
   and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, even three
   countries.

   ^12Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of
   those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

   ^13Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong,
   that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them
   out.

   ^14And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou
   given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great
   people, forasmuch as the Lord hath blessed me hitherto?

   ^15And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee
   up to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of
   the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for
   thee.

   ^16And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and
   all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots
   of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and they who are
   of the valley of Jezreel.

   ^17And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to
   Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou
   shalt not have one lot only:

   ^18But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt
   cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt
   drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though
   they be strong.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together
   at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the
   land was subdued before them.

   ^2And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which
   had not yet received their inheritance.

   ^3And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye slack to
   go to possess the land, which the Lord God of your fathers hath given
   you?

   ^4Give out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send
   them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it
   according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come again to me.

   ^5And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their
   coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts
   on the north.

   ^6Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the
   description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the
   Lord our God.

   ^7But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
   Lord is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of
   Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east,
   which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them.

   ^8And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went
   to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
   describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you
   before the Lord in Shiloh.

   ^9And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
   cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host
   at Shiloh.

   ^10And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord: and there
   Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their
   divisions.

   ^11And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up
   according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
   between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.

   ^12And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border
   went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through
   the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
   wilderness of Bethaven.

   ^13And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz,
   which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar,
   near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron.

   ^14And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea
   southward, from the hill that lieth before Beth- horon southward; and
   the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjath- jearim, a
   city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.

   ^15And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the
   border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of
   Nephtoah:

   ^16And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth
   before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the valley of
   the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the
   side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,

   ^17And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went
   forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Adummim,
   and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,

   ^18And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and
   went down unto Arabah:

   ^19And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward: and
   the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at
   the south end of Jordan: this was the south coast.

   ^20And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the
   inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round
   about, according to their families.

   ^21Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to
   their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,

   ^22And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel,

   ^23And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,

   ^24And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their
   villages:

   ^25Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,

   ^26And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,

   ^27And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,

   ^28And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and
   Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance
   of the children of Benjamin according to their families.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the
   children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance
   was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.

   ^2And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,

   ^3And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem,

   ^4And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,

   ^5And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah,

   ^6And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:

   ^7Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:

   ^8And all the villages that were round about these cities to
   Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe
   of the children of Simeon according to their families.

   ^9Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of
   the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too
   much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance
   within the inheritance of them.

   ^10And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to
   their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:

   ^11And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to
   Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;

   ^12And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border
   of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to
   Japhia,

   ^13And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittahhepher, to
   Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to Neah;

   ^14And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the
   outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:

   ^15And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem:
   twelve cities with their villages.

   ^16This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to
   their families, these cities with their villages.

   ^17And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of
   Issachar according to their families.

   ^18And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,

   ^19And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,

   ^20And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,

   ^21And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and Bethpazzez;

   ^22And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh;
   and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with
   their villages.

   ^23This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar
   according to their families, the cities and their villages.

   ^24And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher
   according to their families.

   ^25And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,

   ^26And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel
   westward, and to Shihorlibnath;

   ^27And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to
   Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel toward the north side of
   Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,

   ^28And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon;

   ^29And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre;
   and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the
   sea from the coast to Achzib:

   ^30Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their
   villages.

   ^31This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher
   according to their families, these cities with their villages.

   ^32The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the
   children of Naphtali according to their families.

   ^33And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami,
   Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at
   Jordan:

   ^34And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out
   from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and
   reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the
   sunrising.

   ^35And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and
   Chinnereth,

   ^36And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,

   ^37And Kedesh, and Edrei, and Enhazor,

   ^38And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh;
   nineteen cities with their villages.

   ^39This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali
   according to their families, the cities and their villages.

   ^40And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan
   according to their families.

   ^41And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and
   Irshemesh,

   ^42And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,

   ^43And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,

   ^44And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,

   ^45And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon,

   ^46And Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.

   ^47And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them:
   therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took
   it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and
   dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their
   father.

   ^48This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan
   according to their families, these cities with their villages.

   ^49When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by
   their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the
   son of Nun among them:

   ^50According to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he
   asked, even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and
   dwelt therein.

   ^51These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the
   son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children
   of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the Lord,
   at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end
   of dividing the country.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   The Lord also spake unto Joshua, saying,

   ^2Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities
   of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:

   ^3That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may
   flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

   ^4And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at
   the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in
   the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city
   unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

   ^5And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not
   deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour
   unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.

   ^6And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
   congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
   shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his
   own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.

   ^7And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem
   in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of
   Judah.

   ^8And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer
   in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth
   in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe
   of Manasseh.

   ^9These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and
   for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any
   person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the
   avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the
   priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the
   fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;

   ^2And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The
   Lord commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with
   the suburbs thereof for our cattle.

   ^3And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
   inheritance, at the commandment of the Lord, these cities and their
   suburbs.

   ^4And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the
   children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out
   of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the
   tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

   ^5And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families
   of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the
   half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.

   ^6And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
   tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
   of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
   cities.

   ^7The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of
   Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun,
   twelve cities.

   ^8And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities
   with their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

   ^9And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of
   the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here
   mentioned by name,

   ^10Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the
   Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the
   first lot.

   ^11And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city
   is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round
   about it.

   ^12But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to
   Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.

   ^13Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her
   suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her
   suburbs,

   ^14And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,

   ^15And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,

   ^16And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
   Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.

   ^17And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with
   her suburbs,

   ^18Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.

   ^19All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen
   cities with their suburbs.

   ^20And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which
   remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their
   lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.

   ^21For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be
   a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,

   ^22And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four
   cities.

   ^23And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon
   with her suburbs,

   ^24Aijalon with her suburbs, Gath- rimmon with her suburbs; four
   cities.

   ^25And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and
   Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.

   ^26All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the
   children of Kohath that remained.

   ^27And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites,
   out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with
   her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beeshterah with
   her suburbs; two cities.

   ^28And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh
   with her suburbs,

   ^29Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim with her suburbs; four cities.

   ^30And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with
   her suburbs,

   ^31Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.

   ^32And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
   suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with her
   suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.

   ^33All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were
   thirteen cities with their suburbs.

   ^34And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the
   Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and
   Kartah with her suburbs,

   ^35Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.

   ^36And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah
   with her suburbs,

   ^37Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four
   cities.

   ^38And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to
   be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,

   ^39Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in
   all.

   ^40So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families,
   which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot
   twelve cities.

   ^41All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children
   of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.

   ^42These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them:
   thus were all these cities.

   ^43And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give
   unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

   ^44And the Lord gave them rest round about, according to all that he
   sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
   enemies before them; the Lord delivered all their enemies into their
   hand.

   ^45There failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken
   unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe
   of Manasseh,

   ^2And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the
   Lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded
   you:

   ^3Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but
   have kept the charge of the commandment of the Lord your God.

   ^4And now the Lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he
   promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents,
   and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the
   Lord gave you on the other side Jordan.

   ^5But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses
   the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to
   walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto
   him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.

   ^6So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their
   tents.

   ^7Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given
   possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among
   their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them
   away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,

   ^8And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your
   tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with
   brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of
   your enemies with your brethren.

   ^9And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe
   of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of
   Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of
   Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed,
   according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

   ^10And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land
   of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
   tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see
   to.

   ^11And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben
   and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an
   altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the
   passage of the children of Israel.

   ^12And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation
   of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go
   up to war against them.

   ^13And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to
   the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land
   of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,

   ^14And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout
   all the tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of
   their fathers among the thousands of Israel.

   ^15And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of
   Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and
   they spake with them, saying,

   ^16Thus saith the whole congregation of the Lord, What trespass is this
   that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day
   from following the Lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye
   might rebel this day against the Lord?

   ^17Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not
   cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the
   congregation of the Lord,

   ^18But that ye must turn away this day from following the Lord? and it
   will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, that to morrow he
   will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.

   ^19Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
   pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the
   Lord'S tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel not
   against the Lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar beside
   the altar of the Lord our God.

   ^20Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
   thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man
   perished not alone in his iniquity.

   ^21Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
   tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of
   Israel,

   ^22The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel
   he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against
   the Lord, (save us not this day,)

   ^23That we have built us an altar to turn from following the Lord, or
   if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer
   peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require it;

   ^24And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In
   time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What
   have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel?

   ^25For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you, ye
   children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no part in the Lord: so
   shall your children make our children cease from fearing the Lord.

   ^26Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for
   burnt offering, nor for sacrifice:

   ^27But that it may be a witness between us, and you, and our
   generations after us, that we might do the service of the Lord before
   him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our
   peace offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time
   to come, Ye have no part in the Lord.

   ^28Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to us
   or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again, Behold
   the pattern of the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for
   burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness between us and
   you.

   ^29God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day
   from following the Lord, to build an altar for burnt offerings, for
   meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the Lord our God
   that is before his tabernacle.

   ^30And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation
   and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the
   words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
   children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.

   ^31And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of
   Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh,
   This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, because ye have not
   committed this trespass against the Lord: now ye have delivered the
   children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.

   ^32And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes,
   returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out
   of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of
   Israel, and brought them word again.

   ^33And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of
   Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in battle,
   to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt.

   ^34And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar
   Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the Lord is God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   And it came to pass a long time after that the Lord had given rest unto
   Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old and
   stricken in age.

   ^2And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for their
   heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said unto
   them, I am old and stricken in age:

   ^3And ye have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto all these
   nations because of you; for the Lord your God is he that hath fought
   for you.

   ^4Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to
   be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations
   that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

   ^5And the Lord your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive
   them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the
   Lord your God hath promised unto you.

   ^6Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written
   in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to
   the right hand or to the left;

   ^7That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you;
   neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by
   them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves unto them:

   ^8But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.

   ^9For the Lord hath driven out from before you great nations and
   strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
   this day.

   ^10One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lord your God, he it
   is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.

   ^11Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your
   God.

   ^12Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of
   these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
   marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you:

   ^13Know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive out
   any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and
   traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes,
   until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord your God hath
   given you.

   ^14And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and ye
   know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing hath
   failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning
   you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath failed
   thereof.

   ^15Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come
   upon you, which the Lord your God promised you; so shall the Lord bring
   upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this
   good land which the Lord your God hath given you.

   ^16When ye have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your God, which
   he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
   yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the Lord be kindled against
   you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath
   given unto you.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for
   the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and
   for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.

   ^2And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the Lord God of
   Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
   even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they
   served other gods.

   ^3And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and
   led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and
   gave him Isaac.

   ^4And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount
   Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.

   ^5I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that
   which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.

   ^6And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea;
   and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen
   unto the Red sea.

   ^7And when they cried unto the Lord, he put darkness between you and
   the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and
   your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the
   wilderness a long season.

   ^8And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the
   other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into your
   hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from
   before you.

   ^9Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against
   Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:

   ^10But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed you still:
   so I delivered you out of his hand.

   ^11And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of
   Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
   Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the
   Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.

   ^12And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before
   you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy sword, nor
   with thy bow.

   ^13And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities
   which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
   oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.

   ^14Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in
   truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
   side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.

   ^15And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day
   whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that
   were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in
   whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
   Lord.

   ^16And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake
   the Lord, to serve other gods;

   ^17For the Lord our God, he it is that brought us up and our fathers
   out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and which did
   those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein
   we went, and among all the people through whom we passed:

   ^18And the Lord drave out from before us all the people, even the
   Amorites which dwelt in the land: therefore will we also serve the
   Lord; for he is our God.

   ^19And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the Lord: for he is
   an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
   transgressions nor your sins.

   ^20If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn
   and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.

   ^21And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the Lord.

   ^22And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves
   that ye have chosen you the Lord, to serve him. And they said, We are
   witnesses.

   ^23Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are among
   you, and incline your heart unto the Lord God of Israel.

   ^24And the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and
   his voice will we obey.

   ^25So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a
   statute and an ordinance in Shechem.

   ^26And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took
   a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
   sanctuary of the Lord.

   ^27And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a
   witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the Lord which he
   spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny
   your God.

   ^28So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

   ^29And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun,
   the servant of the Lord, died, being an hundred and ten years old.

   ^30And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
   Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
   of Gaash.

   ^31And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days
   of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works
   of the Lord, that he had done for Israel.

   ^32And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out
   of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob
   bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces
   of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.

   ^33And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
   that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
   Ephraim.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Judges
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of
   Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against the
   Canaanites first, to fight against them?

   ^2And the Lord said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the
   land into his hand.

   ^3And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot,
   that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with
   thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.

   ^4And Judah went up; and the Lord delivered the Canaanites and the
   Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand
   men.

   ^5And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and
   they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

   ^6But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and
   cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

   ^7And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
   and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I
   have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem,
   and there he died.

   ^8Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken
   it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on
   fire.

   ^9And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the
   Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
   valley.

   ^10And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the
   name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and
   Ahiman, and Talmai.

   ^11And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the
   name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher:

   ^12And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him
   will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.

   ^13And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it: and
   he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.

   ^14And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask
   of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb said
   unto her, What wilt thou?

   ^15And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a
   south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper
   springs and the nether springs.

   ^16And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out of
   the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness
   of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt
   among the people.

   ^17And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites
   that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the
   city was called Hormah.

   ^18Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the
   coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.

   ^19And the Lord was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the
   mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
   because they had chariots of iron.

   ^20And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled
   thence the three sons of Anak.

   ^21And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
   inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of
   Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.

   ^22And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the
   Lord was with them.

   ^23And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the
   city before was Luz.)

   ^24And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said
   unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we
   will shew thee mercy.

   ^25And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the
   city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his
   family.

   ^26And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city,
   and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this
   day.

   ^27Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her
   towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her
   towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants
   of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.

   ^28And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the
   Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.

   ^29Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer;
   but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.

   ^30Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
   inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became
   tributaries.

   ^31Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the
   inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor
   of Aphik, nor of Rehob:

   ^32But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the
   land: for they did not drive them out.

   ^33Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor
   the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the
   inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Bethshemesh
   and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them.

   ^34And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for
   they would not suffer them to come down to the valley:

   ^35But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in
   Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they
   became tributaries.

   ^36And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim,
   from the rock, and upward.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I
   made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land
   which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my
   covenant with you.

   ^2And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
   shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
   have ye done this?

   ^3Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but
   they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare
   unto you.

   ^4And it came to pass, when the angel of the Lord spake these words
   unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice,
   and wept.

   ^5And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed
   there unto the Lord.

   ^6And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went
   every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

   ^7And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the
   days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
   works of the Lord, that he did for Israel.

   ^8And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being an
   hundred and ten years old.

   ^9And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathheres,
   in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.

   ^10And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and
   there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor
   yet the works which he had done for Israel.

   ^11And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
   served Baalim:

   ^12And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them
   out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the
   people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and
   provoked the Lord to anger.

   ^13And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.

   ^14And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered
   them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them
   into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any
   longer stand before their enemies.

   ^15Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them
   for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them:
   and they were greatly distressed.

   ^16Nevertheless the Lord raised up judges, which delivered them out of
   the hand of those that spoiled them.

   ^17And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
   whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
   quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
   commandments of the Lord; but they did not so.

   ^18And when the Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the
   judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days
   of the judge: for it repented the Lord because of their groanings by
   reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

   ^19And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned,
   and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
   gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
   their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

   ^20And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel; and he said,
   Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I
   commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice;

   ^21I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the
   nations which Joshua left when he died:

   ^22That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way
   of the Lord to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not.

   ^23Therefore the Lord left those nations, without driving them out
   hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Now these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them,
   even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;

   ^2Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to
   teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof;

   ^3Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and
   the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount
   Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath.

   ^4And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would
   hearken unto the commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their
   fathers by the hand of Moses.

   ^5And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and
   Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites:

   ^6And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their
   daughters to their sons, and served their gods.

   ^7And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
   forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the groves.

   ^8Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold
   them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the
   children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years.

   ^9And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised
   up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even
   Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.

   ^10And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and
   went out to war: and the Lord delivered Chushanrishathaim king of
   Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against
   Chushanrishathaim.

   ^11And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz
   died.

   ^12And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord:
   and the Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel,
   because they had done evil in the sight of the Lord.

   ^13And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went
   and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

   ^14So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen
   years.

   ^15But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised
   them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man
   lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon
   the king of Moab.

   ^16But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length;
   and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

   ^17And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a
   very fat man.

   ^18And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the
   people that bare the present.

   ^19But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal,
   and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep
   silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.

   ^20And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
   which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from
   God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat.

   ^21And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right
   thigh, and thrust it into his belly:

   ^22And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon
   the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and
   the dirt came out.

   ^23Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
   parlour upon him, and locked them.

   ^24When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that,
   behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he
   covereth his feet in his summer chamber.

   ^25And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not
   the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them:
   and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.

   ^26And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries,
   and escaped unto Seirath.

   ^27And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the
   mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from
   the mount, and he before them.

   ^28And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the Lord hath delivered
   your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him,
   and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to
   pass over.

   ^29And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
   lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.

   ^30So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land
   had rest fourscore years.

   ^31And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
   Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
   Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord,
   when Ehud was dead.

   ^2And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that
   reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in
   Harosheth of the Gentiles.

   ^3And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord: for he had nine
   hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
   children of Israel.

   ^4And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at
   that time.

   ^5And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel
   in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for
   judgment.

   ^6And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of
   Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the Lord God of Israel
   commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee
   ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of
   Zebulun?

   ^7And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of
   Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver
   him into thine hand.

   ^8And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but
   if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.

   ^9And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey
   that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell
   Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak
   to Kedesh.

   ^10And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with
   ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.

   ^11Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father
   in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his
   tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.

   ^12And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to
   mount Tabor.

   ^13And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
   chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth
   of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.

   ^14And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the
   Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the Lord gone out
   before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men
   after him.

   ^15And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his
   host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted
   down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.

   ^16But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto
   Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the
   edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.

   ^17Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of
   Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor
   and the house of Heber the Kenite.

   ^18And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my
   lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into
   the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

   ^19And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink;
   for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink,
   and covered him.

   ^20Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall
   be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any
   man here? that thou shalt say, No.

   ^21Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer
   in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his
   temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and
   weary. So he died.

   ^22And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and
   said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest.
   And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail
   was in his temples.

   ^23So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the
   children of Israel.

   ^24And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
   against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king
   of Canaan.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying,

   ^2Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people
   willingly offered themselves.

   ^3Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto
   the Lord; I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.

   ^4Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the
   field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds
   also dropped water.

   ^5The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from
   before the Lord God of Israel.

   ^6In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the
   highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

   ^7The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until
   that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.

   ^8They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or
   spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?

   ^9My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves
   willingly among the people. Bless ye the Lord.

   ^10Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
   walk by the way.

   ^11They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of
   drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the
   Lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in
   Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.

   ^12Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and
   lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

   ^13Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among
   the people: the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

   ^14Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee,
   Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out
   of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

   ^15And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and
   also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of
   Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

   ^16Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the
   flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of
   heart.

   ^17Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher
   continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

   ^18Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto
   the death in the high places of the field.

   ^19The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in
   Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.

   ^20They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against
   Sisera.

   ^21The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river
   Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

   ^22Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the
   pransings of their mighty ones.

   ^23Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the
   inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to
   the help of the Lord against the mighty.

   ^24Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be,
   blessed shall she be above women in the tent.

   ^25He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a
   lordly dish.

   ^26She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's
   hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head,
   when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

   ^27At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he
   fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

   ^28The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the
   lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of
   his chariots?

   ^29Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,

   ^30Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a
   damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers
   colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides,
   meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?

   ^31So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him
   be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest
   forty years.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord: and the
   Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.

   ^2And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the
   Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the
   mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

   ^3And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and
   the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against
   them;

   ^4And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the
   earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel,
   neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

   ^5For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as
   grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without
   number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

   ^6And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and
   the children of Israel cried unto the Lord.

   ^7And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord
   because of the Midianites,

   ^8That the Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said
   unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from
   Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;

   ^9And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the
   hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you, and
   gave you their land;

   ^10And I said unto you, I am the Lord your God; fear not the gods of
   the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

   ^11And there came an angel of the Lord, and sat under an oak which was
   in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son Gideon
   threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.

   ^12And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The
   Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.

   ^13And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why
   then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our
   fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt?
   but now the Lord hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
   the Midianites.

   ^14And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and
   thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent
   thee?

   ^15And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel?
   behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my
   father's house.

   ^16And the Lord said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou
   shalt smite the Midianites as one man.

   ^17And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then
   shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

   ^18Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
   forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry
   until thou come again.

   ^19And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an
   ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a
   pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

   ^20And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the
   unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.
   And he did so.

   ^21Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that was
   in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there
   rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened
   cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight.

   ^22And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord, Gideon
   said, Alas, O Lord GOD! for because I have seen an angel of the Lord
   face to face.

   ^23And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt
   not die.

   ^24Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord, and called it
   Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

   ^25And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him,
   Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years
   old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut
   down the grove that is by it:

   ^26And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock,
   in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt
   sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou shalt cut down.

   ^27Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord had
   said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's household,
   and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it
   by night.

   ^28And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the
   altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it,
   and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.

   ^29And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when
   they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done
   this thing.

   ^30Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he
   may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he
   hath cut down the grove that was by it.

   ^31And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for
   Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
   death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
   himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

   ^32Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal
   plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

   ^33Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the
   east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the valley
   of Jezreel.

   ^34But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet;
   and Abiezer was gathered after him.

   ^35And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was
   gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto
   Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

   ^36And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as
   thou hast said,

   ^37Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; and if the dew be
   on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth beside, then shall
   I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said.

   ^38And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
   fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
   water.

   ^39And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and
   I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once
   with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all
   the ground let there be dew.

   ^40And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and
   there was dew on all the ground.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him,
   rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host
   of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh,
   in the valley.

   ^2And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are too
   many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt
   themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.

   ^3Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying,
   Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
   mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand;
   and there remained ten thousand.

   ^4And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring
   them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it
   shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the
   same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall
   not go with thee, the same shall not go.

   ^5So he brought down the people unto the water: and the Lord said unto
   Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog
   lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth
   down upon his knees to drink.

   ^6And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their
   mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed
   down upon their knees to drink water.

   ^7And the Lord said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped
   will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let
   all the other people go every man unto his place.

   ^8So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he
   sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those
   three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the
   valley.

   ^9And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him,
   Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine
   hand.

   ^10But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to
   the host:

   ^11And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands
   be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah
   his servant unto the outside of the armed men that were in the host.

   ^12And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the
   east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their
   camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude.

   ^13And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream
   unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake
   of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent,
   and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.

   ^14And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the
   sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand
   hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.

   ^15And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the
   interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host
   of Israel, and said, Arise; for the Lord hath delivered into your hand
   the host of Midian.

   ^16And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
   put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
   within the pitchers.

   ^17And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
   when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so
   shall ye do.

   ^18When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow ye
   the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of
   the Lord, and of Gideon.

   ^19So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the
   outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had
   but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
   pitchers that were in their hands.

   ^20And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers,
   and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right
   hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the Lord, and of
   Gideon.

   ^21And they stood every man in his place round about the camp: and all
   the host ran, and cried, and fled.

   ^22And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the Lord set every
   man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
   host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah,
   unto Tabbath.

   ^23And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali,
   and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the
   Midianites.

   ^24And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying,
   Come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto
   Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves
   together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan.

   ^25And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they
   slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of
   Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
   Gideon on the other side Jordan.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus,
   that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
   Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.

   ^2And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is
   not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of
   Abiezer?

   ^3God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and
   Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger
   was abated toward him, when he had said that.

   ^4And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred
   men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

   ^5And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of
   bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am
   pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.

   ^6And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna
   now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?

   ^7And Gideon said, Therefore when the Lord hath delivered Zebah and
   Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of
   the wilderness and with briers.

   ^8And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
   the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.

   ^9And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again
   in peace, I will break down this tower.

   ^10Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them,
   about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the
   children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men
   that drew sword.

   ^11And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the
   east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host: for the host was
   secure.

   ^12And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took
   the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the
   host.

   ^13And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun was
   up,

   ^14And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him:
   and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders
   thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.

   ^15And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and
   Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah
   and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men
   that are weary?

   ^16And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and
   briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.

   ^17And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.

   ^18Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they
   whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they;
   each one resembled the children of a king.

   ^19And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: as
   the Lord liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.

   ^20And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the
   youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.

   ^21Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
   the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and
   Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels' necks.

   ^22Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both
   thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us
   from the hand of Midian.

   ^23And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall
   my son rule over you: the Lord shall rule over you.

   ^24And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye
   would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden
   earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)

   ^25And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a
   garment, and did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.

   ^26And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
   thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and
   collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside
   the chains that were about their camels' necks.

   ^27And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in
   Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing
   became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.

   ^28Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they
   lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty
   years in the days of Gideon.

   ^29And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.

   ^30And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he
   had many wives.

   ^31And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son,
   whose name he called Abimelech.

   ^32And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried
   in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

   ^33And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children
   of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made
   Baalberith their god.

   ^34And the children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who
   had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side:

   ^35Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely,
   Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother's
   brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house
   of his mother's father, saying,

   ^2Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is
   better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are
   threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you?
   remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.

   ^3And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of
   Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech;
   for they said, He is our brother.

   ^4And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the
   house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons,
   which followed him.

   ^5And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren
   the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one
   stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was
   left; for he hid himself.

   ^6And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
   Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
   that was in Shechem.

   ^7And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of
   mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
   Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.

   ^8The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they
   said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.

   ^9But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
   wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the
   trees?

   ^10And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.

   ^11But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and
   my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?

   ^12Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.

   ^13And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth
   God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?

   ^14Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over
   us.

   ^15And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king
   over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let
   fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.

   ^16Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have
   made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his
   house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands;

   ^17(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and
   delivered you out of the hand of Midian:

   ^18And ye are risen up against my father's house this day, and have
   slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have
   made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of
   Shechem, because he is your brother;)

   ^19If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with
   his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also
   rejoice in you:

   ^20But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of
   Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of
   Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.

   ^21And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there,
   for fear of Abimelech his brother.

   ^22When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel,

   ^23Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of
   Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech:

   ^24That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal
   might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which
   slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing
   of his brethren.

   ^25And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the
   mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it
   was told Abimelech.

   ^26And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
   Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.

   ^27And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and
   trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their god,
   and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

   ^28And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem,
   that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his
   officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should
   we serve him?

   ^29And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove
   Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.

   ^30And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son
   of Ebed, his anger was kindled.

   ^31And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal
   the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they
   fortify the city against thee.

   ^32Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee,
   and lie in wait in the field:

   ^33And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou
   shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, when he and the
   people that is with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to
   them as thou shalt find occasion.

   ^34And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by
   night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.

   ^35And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the
   gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with
   him, from lying in wait.

   ^36And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come
   people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him,
   Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.

   ^37And Gaal spake again and said, See there come people down by the
   middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of
   Meonenim.

   ^38Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
   saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the
   people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with
   them.

   ^39And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with
   Abimelech.

   ^40And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were
   overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.

   ^41And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his
   brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.

   ^42And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the
   field; and they told Abimelech.

   ^43And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and
   laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were come
   forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them.

   ^44And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
   and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
   companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
   them.

   ^45And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the
   city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the city, and
   sowed it with salt.

   ^46And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they
   entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.

   ^47And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem
   were gathered together.

   ^48And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that
   were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a
   bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder, and
   said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do, make
   haste, and do as I have done.

   ^49And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and
   followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
   upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about
   a thousand men and women.

   ^50Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took
   it.

   ^51But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all
   the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them, and
   gat them up to the top of the tower.

   ^52And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went
   hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

   ^53And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's
   head, and all to brake his skull.

   ^54Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said
   unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman
   slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.

   ^55And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they
   departed every man unto his place.

   ^56Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his
   father, in slaying his seventy brethren:

   ^57And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their
   heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah,
   the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount
   Ephraim.

   ^2And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried
   in Shamir.

   ^3And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and
   two years.

   ^4And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had
   thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which are in
   the land of Gilead.

   ^5And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.

   ^6And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord,
   and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods
   of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon,
   and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the Lord, and served not
   him.

   ^7And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them
   into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children
   of Ammon.

   ^8And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel:
   eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side
   Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.

   ^9Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also
   against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim;
   so that Israel was sore distressed.

   ^10And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have
   sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also
   served Baalim.

   ^11And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you
   from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon,
   and from the Philistines?

   ^12The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did
   oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.

   ^13Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will
   deliver you no more.

   ^14Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you
   in the time of your tribulation.

   ^15And the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned: do
   thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
   pray thee, this day.

   ^16And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the
   Lord: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

   ^17Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in
   Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and
   encamped in Mizpeh.

   ^18And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man
   is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall
   be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the
   son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.

   ^2And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and
   they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in
   our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.

   ^3Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob:
   and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.

   ^4And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon
   made war against Israel.

   ^5And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against
   Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of
   Tob:

   ^6And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may
   fight with the children of Ammon.

   ^7And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and
   expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when
   ye are in distress?

   ^8And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again
   to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the
   children of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

   ^9And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home
   again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver them
   before me, shall I be your head?

   ^10And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The Lord be witness
   between us, if we do not so according to thy words.

   ^11Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made
   him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words
   before the Lord in Mizpeh.

   ^12And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon,
   saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to
   fight in my land?

   ^13And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers
   of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of
   Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore
   restore those lands again peaceably.

   ^14And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of
   Ammon:

   ^15And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the
   land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:

   ^16But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the
   wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh;

   ^17Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I
   pray thee, pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not
   hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab:
   but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.

   ^18Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land
   of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of
   Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the
   border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.

   ^19And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king
   of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee,
   through thy land into my place.

   ^20But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon
   gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought
   against Israel.

   ^21And the Lord God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into
   the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the
   land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

   ^22And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even
   unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.

   ^23So now the Lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from
   before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it?

   ^24Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to
   possess? So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before us,
   them will we possess.

   ^25And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king
   of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight
   against them,

   ^26While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her
   towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon,
   three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover them within that
   time?

   ^27Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to
   war against me: the Lord the Judge be judge this day between the
   children of Israel and the children of Ammon.

   ^28Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the
   words of Jephthah which he sent him.

   ^29Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he passed over
   Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh
   of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.

   ^30And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt
   without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands,

   ^31Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my
   house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon,
   shall surely be the Lord'S, and I will offer it up for a burnt
   offering.

   ^32So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against
   them; and the Lord delivered them into his hands.

   ^33And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even
   twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great
   slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children
   of Israel.

   ^34And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his
   daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she
   was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

   ^35And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and
   said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art
   one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord,
   and I cannot go back.

   ^36And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto
   the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy
   mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine
   enemies, even of the children of Ammon.

   ^37And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me
   alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
   bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.

   ^38And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went
   with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.

   ^39And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto
   her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed:
   and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,

   ^40That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of
   Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
   northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to
   fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with
   thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.

   ^2And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife
   with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not
   out of their hands.

   ^3And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands,
   and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the Lord delivered
   them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to
   fight against me?

   ^4Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought
   with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said,
   Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among
   the Manassites.

   ^5And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the
   Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were
   escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art
   thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;

   ^6Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth:
   for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and
   slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the
   Ephraimites forty and two thousand.

   ^7And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the
   Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.

   ^8And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.

   ^9And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad,
   and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged
   Israel seven years.

   ^10Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem.

   ^11And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged
   Israel ten years.

   ^12And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the
   country of Zebulun.

   ^13And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel.

   ^14And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore
   and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.

   ^15And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in
   Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord; and
   the Lord delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.

   ^2And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites,
   whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

   ^3And the angel of the Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her,
   Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive,
   and bear a son.

   ^4Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
   drink, and eat not any unclean thing:

   ^5For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come
   on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb:
   and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the
   Philistines.

   ^6Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came
   unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of
   God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he
   me his name:

   ^7But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and
   now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for
   the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his
   death.

   ^8Then Manoah intreated the Lord, and said, O my Lord, let the man of
   God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
   shall do unto the child that shall be born.

   ^9And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came
   again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband
   was not with her.

   ^10And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said
   unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the
   other day.

   ^11And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and
   said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he
   said, I am.

   ^12And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order
   the child, and how shall we do unto him?

   ^13And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto
   the woman let her beware.

   ^14She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let
   her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all that I
   commanded her let her observe.

   ^15And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord, I pray thee, let us
   detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

   ^16And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I
   will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering,
   thou must offer it unto the Lord. For Manoah knew not that he was an
   angel of the Lord.

   ^17And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord, What is thy name, that
   when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?

   ^18And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Why askest thou thus after
   my name, seeing it is secret?

   ^19So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it upon a
   rock unto the Lord: and the angel did wondrously; and Manoah and his
   wife looked on.

   ^20For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off
   the altar, that the angel of the Lord ascended in the flame of the
   altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces to
   the ground.

   ^21But the angel of the Lord did no more appear to Manoah and to his
   wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the Lord.

   ^22And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have
   seen God.

   ^23But his wife said unto him, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he
   would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
   hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
   at this time have told us such things as these.

   ^24And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child
   grew, and the Lord blessed him.

   ^25And the Spirit of the Lord began to move him at times in the camp of
   Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the
   daughters of the Philistines.

   ^2And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have
   seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now
   therefore get her for me to wife.

   ^3Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman
   among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou
   goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said
   unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

   ^4But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord, that
   he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the
   Philistines had dominion over Israel.

   ^5Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and
   came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
   against him.

   ^6And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent him as
   he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told
   not his father or his mother what he had done.

   ^7And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson
   well.

   ^8And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see
   the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees and
   honey in the carcase of the lion.

   ^9And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his
   father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not
   them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

   ^10So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a
   feast; for so used the young men to do.

   ^11And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
   companions to be with him.

   ^12And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you:
   if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast,
   and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change
   of garments:

   ^13But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty sheets
   and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy
   riddle, that we may hear it.

   ^14And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of
   the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days
   expound the riddle.

   ^15And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's
   wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest
   we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye called us to
   take that we have? is it not so?

   ^16And Samson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me,
   and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my
   people, and hast not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have
   not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?

   ^17And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted:
   and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she
   lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her
   people.

   ^18And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the
   sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a
   lion? And he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye
   had not found out my riddle.

   ^19And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down to
   Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
   change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger
   was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.

   ^20But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as
   his friend.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest,
   that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will go in to
   my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him to go in.

   ^2And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated
   her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister
   fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.

   ^3And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless than
   the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.

   ^4And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands,
   and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two
   tails.

   ^5And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the
   standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
   also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

   ^6Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered,
   Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife,
   and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt
   her and her father with fire.

   ^7And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be
   avenged of you, and after that I will cease.

   ^8And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went
   down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.

   ^9Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread
   themselves in Lehi.

   ^10And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they
   answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done
   to us.

   ^11Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam,
   and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers
   over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said unto
   them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.

   ^12And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we may
   deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto
   them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

   ^13And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast, and
   deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And
   they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock.

   ^14And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and
   the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the cords that were
   upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands
   loosed from off his hands.

   ^15And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and
   took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

   ^16And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with
   the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.

   ^17And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he
   cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
   Ramathlehi.

   ^18And he was sore athirst, and called on the Lord, and said, Thou hast
   given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now
   shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?

   ^19But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came
   water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he
   revived: wherefore he called the name thereof Enhakkore, which is in
   Lehi unto this day.

   ^20And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto
   her.

   ^2And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they
   compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the
   city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is
   day, we shall kill him.

   ^3And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
   doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
   them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up
   to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.

   ^4And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of
   Sorek, whose name was Delilah.

   ^5And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her,
   Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means
   we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him: and we
   will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

   ^6And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great
   strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.

   ^7And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that
   were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

   ^8Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs
   which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

   ^9Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber.
   And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he
   brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
   fire. So his strength was not known.

   ^10And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told
   me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound.

   ^11And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never
   were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.

   ^12Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said
   unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were liers in
   wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a
   thread.

   ^13And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told
   me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto
   her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

   ^14And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines
   be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away
   with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

   ^15And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine
   heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast
   not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

   ^16And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and
   urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death;

   ^17That he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not
   come a razor upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from
   my mother's womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and
   I shall become weak, and be like any other man.

   ^18And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent
   and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once,
   for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines
   came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

   ^19And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and
   she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she began
   to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

   ^20And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out
   of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and
   shake myself. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.

   ^21But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him
   down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in
   the prison house.

   ^22Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
   shaven.

   ^23Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to
   offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
   said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.

   ^24And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said,
   Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of
   our country, which slew many of us.

   ^25And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said,
   Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson
   out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him
   between the pillars.

   ^26And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer me
   that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I may
   lean upon them.

   ^27Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the
   Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
   thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.

   ^28And Samson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord GOD, remember me,
   I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God,
   that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.

   ^29And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house
   stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand,
   and of the other with his left.

   ^30And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed
   himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon
   all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his
   death were more than they which he slew in his life.

   ^31Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
   took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol
   in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty
   years.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.

   ^2And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver
   that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
   also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his
   mother said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my son.

   ^3And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his
   mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the
   Lord from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
   image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.

   ^4Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took two
   hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
   thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
   of Micah.

   ^5And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
   teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

   ^6In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that
   which was right in his own eyes.

   ^7And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of
   Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.

   ^8And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to sojourn
   where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the house
   of Micah, as he journeyed.

   ^9And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I
   am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a
   place.

   ^10And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and
   a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year, and a
   suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.

   ^11And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man
   was unto him as one of his sons.

   ^12And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his
   priest, and was in the house of Micah.

   ^13Then said Micah, Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I
   have a Levite to my priest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe
   of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that
   day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of
   Israel.

   ^2And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their
   coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the
   land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land:
   who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged
   there.

   ^3When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the
   young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
   Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
   hast thou here?

   ^4And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath
   hired me, and I am his priest.

   ^5And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we
   may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

   ^6And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the Lord is your
   way wherein ye go.

   ^7Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people
   that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
   Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
   that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
   Zidonians, and had no business with any man.

   ^8And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their
   brethren said unto them, What say ye?

   ^9And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have
   seen the land, and, behold, it is very good: and are ye still? be not
   slothful to go, and to enter to possess the land.

   ^10When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large land:
   for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no want
   of any thing that is in the earth.

   ^11And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of
   Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
   war.

   ^12And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah: wherefore
   they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it is behind
   Kirjathjearim.

   ^13And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house
   of Micah.

   ^14Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
   Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these
   houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
   now therefore consider what ye have to do.

   ^15And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man
   the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.

   ^16And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war, which
   were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.

   ^17And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in
   thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim,
   and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering of the gate
   with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons of war.

   ^18And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image, the
   ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest
   unto them, What do ye?

   ^19And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy
   mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better
   for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a
   priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel?

   ^20And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the
   teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.

   ^21So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle
   and the carriage before them.

   ^22And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that
   were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and
   overtook the children of Dan.

   ^23And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their
   faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with
   such a company?

   ^24And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the
   priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what is this
   that ye say unto me, What aileth thee?

   ^25And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard
   among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life,
   with the lives of thy household.

   ^26And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they
   were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

   ^27And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest which
   he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and
   secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the
   city with fire.

   ^28And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they
   had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth by
   Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.

   ^29And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan
   their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city
   was Laish at the first.

   ^30And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the
   son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to
   the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

   ^31And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, all the
   time that the house of God was in Shiloh.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel,
   that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount
   Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah.

   ^2And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from
   him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four whole
   months.

   ^3And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
   her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple
   of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the
   father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.

   ^4And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he
   abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.

   ^5And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in the
   morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said unto
   his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
   afterward go your way.

   ^6And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for
   the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thee, and
   tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.

   ^7And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him:
   therefore he lodged there again.

   ^8And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart: and the
   damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they
   tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

   ^9And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his
   servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him, Behold,
   now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night: behold,
   the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be merry;
   and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.

   ^10But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed,
   and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there were with
   him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.

   ^11And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant
   said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in into this
   city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.

   ^12And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into the
   city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will pass
   over to Gibeah.

   ^13And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of
   these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.

   ^14And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon
   them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.

   ^15And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: and
   when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for there was
   no man that took them into his house to lodging.

   ^16And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at
   even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but
   the men of the place were Benjamites.

   ^17And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the
   street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and
   whence comest thou?

   ^18And he said unto him, We are passing from Bethlehemjudah toward the
   side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and I went to Bethlehemjudah,
   but I am now going to the house of the Lord; and there is no man that
   receiveth me to house.

   ^19Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is
   bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man
   which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.

   ^20And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy
   wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.

   ^21So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses:
   and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

   ^22Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the
   city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at
   the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying,
   Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.

   ^23And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said
   unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly;
   seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.

   ^24Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will
   bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good
   unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.

   ^25But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his concubine,
   and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all
   the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let
   her go.

   ^26Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the
   door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.

   ^27And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the
   house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine
   was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were upon the
   threshold.

   ^28And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered.
   Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
   unto his place.

   ^29And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold
   on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve
   pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.

   ^30And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed
   done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of
   the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak
   your minds.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was
   gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land
   of Gilead, unto the Lord in Mizpeh.

   ^2And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel,
   presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred
   thousand footmen that drew sword.

   ^3(Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were
   gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was
   this wickedness?

   ^4And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and
   said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my
   concubine, to lodge.

   ^5And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
   about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
   have they forced, that she is dead.

   ^6And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
   throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have
   committed lewdness and folly in Israel.

   ^7Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and
   counsel.

   ^8And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go
   to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.

   ^9But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will
   go up by lot against it;

   ^10And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout all the tribes of
   Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten
   thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they
   come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have
   wrought in Israel.

   ^11So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit
   together as one man.

   ^12And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin,
   saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you?

   ^13Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are
   in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
   Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of
   their brethren the children of Israel:

   ^14But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the
   cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel.

   ^15And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the
   cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
   inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

   ^16Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
   lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
   miss.

   ^17And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred
   thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

   ^18And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God,
   and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first to
   the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the Lord said, Judah
   shall go up first.

   ^19And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
   against Gibeah.

   ^20And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the
   men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at Gibeah.

   ^21And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed
   down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand
   men.

   ^22And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set
   their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in
   array the first day.

   ^23(And the children of Israel went up and wept before the Lord until
   even, and asked counsel of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up again to
   battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the Lord said,
   Go up against him.)

   ^24And the children of Israel came near against the children of
   Benjamin the second day.

   ^25And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day,
   and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again
   eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

   ^26Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and
   came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord,
   and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and peace
   offerings before the Lord.

   ^27And the children of Israel enquired of the Lord, (for the ark of the
   covenant of God was there in those days,

   ^28And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it
   in those days,) saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the
   children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said,
   Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.

   ^29And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.

   ^30And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin
   on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at
   other times.

   ^31And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were
   drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, and
   kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the
   house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of
   Israel.

   ^32And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us,
   as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw
   them from the city unto the highways.

   ^33And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put
   themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came
   forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.

   ^34And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
   Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near
   them.

   ^35And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of
   Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand
   and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.

   ^36So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the men
   of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the
   liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.

   ^37And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers
   in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of
   the sword.

   ^38Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the
   liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up
   out of the city.

   ^39And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began to
   smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they
   said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.

   ^40But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar
   of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the flame of
   the city ascended up to heaven.

   ^41And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were
   amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.

   ^42Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the
   way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them which
   came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.

   ^43Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and
   trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.

   ^44And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were men
   of valour.

   ^45And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of
   Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and
   pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them.

   ^46So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five
   thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

   ^47But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock
   Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.

   ^48And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin,
   and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of every
   city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set on fire
   all the cities that they came to.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any
   of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.

   ^2And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even
   before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore;

   ^3And said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel,
   that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?

   ^4And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and
   built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

   ^5And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of
   Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the Lord? For they
   had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the Lord to
   Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.

   ^6And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother,
   and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.

   ^7How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn
   by the Lord that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?

   ^8And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came
   not up to Mizpeh to the Lord? And, behold, there came none to the camp
   from Jabeshgilead to the assembly.

   ^9For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
   inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there.

   ^10And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
   valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of
   Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the
   children.

   ^11And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy
   every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.

   ^12And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four hundred
   young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they
   brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.

   ^13And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of
   Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto them.

   ^14And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which
   they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh- gilead: and yet so they
   sufficed them not.

   ^15And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the Lord had
   made a breach in the tribes of Israel.

   ^16Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for wives
   for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?

   ^17And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped
   of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.

   ^18Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the
   children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife
   to Benjamin.

   ^19Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the Lord in Shiloh
   yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east
   side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the
   south of Lebonah.

   ^20Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and
   lie in wait in the vineyards;

   ^21And see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance
   in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man
   his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.

   ^22And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us
   to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them for
   our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for
   ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be guilty.

   ^23And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according
   to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went
   and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt
   in them.

   ^24And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man
   to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man
   to his inheritance.

   ^25In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which
   was right in his own eyes.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Ruth
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a
   famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to sojourn
   in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.

   ^2And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife
   Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
   Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued
   there.

   ^3And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two
   sons.

   ^4And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one
   was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about
   ten years.

   ^5And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left
   of her two sons and her husband.

   ^6Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from
   the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how that
   the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread.

   ^7Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two
   daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto the
   land of Judah.

   ^8And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her
   mother's house: the Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with
   the dead, and with me.

   ^9The Lord grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of
   her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and
   wept.

   ^10And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
   people.

   ^11And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me?
   are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?

   ^12Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too old to have an
   husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have an husband also
   to night, and should also bear sons;

   ^13Would ye tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them
   from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for
   your sakes that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.

   ^14And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her
   mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her.

   ^15And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
   people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

   ^16And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
   following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou
   lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my
   God:

   ^17Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord
   do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.

   ^18When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then she
   left speaking unto her.

   ^19So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to pass,
   when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved about
   them, and they said, Is this Naomi?

   ^20And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the
   Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.

   ^21I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty: why
   then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord hath testified against me, and
   the Almighty hath afflicted me?

   ^22So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with
   her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to
   Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of
   the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.

   ^2And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field,
   and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace. And
   she said unto her, Go, my daughter.

   ^3And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers:
   and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz,
   who was of the kindred of Elimelech.

   ^4And, behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The
   Lord be with you. And they answered him, The Lord bless thee.

   ^5Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose
   damsel is this?

   ^6And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It
   is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of
   Moab:

   ^7And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers
   among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the
   morning until now, that she tarried a little in the house.

   ^8Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
   glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by
   my maidens:

   ^9Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after
   them: have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee?
   and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which
   the young men have drawn.

   ^10Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said
   unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest
   take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?

   ^11And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me,
   all that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
   husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land
   of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not
   heretofore.

   ^12The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the
   Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

   ^13Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
   thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
   thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

   ^14And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the
   bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the
   reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
   sufficed, and left.

   ^15And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men,
   saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:

   ^16And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave
   them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.

   ^17So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
   gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.

   ^18And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
   saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
   she had reserved after she was sufficed.

   ^19And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day?
   and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of
   thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and
   said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.

   ^20And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the Lord,
   who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And
   Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next
   kinsmen.

   ^21And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt keep
   fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.

   ^22And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
   daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not in
   any other field.

   ^23So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of
   barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I not
   seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?

   ^2And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?
   Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.

   ^3Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
   thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
   the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.

   ^4And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place
   where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet, and lay
   thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.

   ^5And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do.

   ^6And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that her
   mother in law bade her.

   ^7And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he went
   to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and
   uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

   ^8And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned
   himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.

   ^9And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine
   handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
   a near kinsman.

   ^10And he said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: for thou hast
   shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch
   as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

   ^11And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou
   requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a
   virtuous woman.

   ^12And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a
   kinsman nearer than I.

   ^13Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
   perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman's
   part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I
   do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the Lord liveth: lie down until
   the morning.

   ^14And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
   one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman
   came into the floor.

   ^15Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold it.
   And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
   on her: and she went into the city.

   ^16And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou, my
   daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.

   ^17And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he said
   to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.

   ^18Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
   matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
   finished the thing this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and, behold, the
   kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho, such a one!
   turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down.

   ^2And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down
   here. And they sat down.

   ^3And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the
   country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
   Elimelech's:

   ^4And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it before the
   inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem
   it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may
   know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I am after thee.
   And he said, I will redeem it.

   ^5Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi,
   thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to
   raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.

   ^6And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine
   own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot redeem
   it.

   ^7Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning redeeming
   and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off
   his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in
   Israel.

   ^8Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew off
   his shoe.

   ^9And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
   witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and
   all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi.

   ^10Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to
   be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that
   the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and from
   the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.

   ^11And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, We
   are witnesses. The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house
   like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and
   do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:

   ^12And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto
   Judah, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.

   ^13So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto
   her, the Lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.

   ^14And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord, which hath not
   left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in
   Israel.

   ^15And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of
   thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
   better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

   ^16And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse
   unto it.

   ^17And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son
   born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of
   Jesse, the father of David.

   ^18Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,

   ^19And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab,

   ^20And Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,

   ^21And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed,

   ^22And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The First Book of

Samuel

  Otherwise Called the First Book of the Kings
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 1

   Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and
   his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of
   Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:

   ^2And he had two wives; the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of
   the other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no
   children.

   ^3And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
   sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli,
   Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the Lord, were there.

   ^4And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his
   wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:

   ^5But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but
   the Lord had shut up her womb.

   ^6And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret,
   because the Lord had shut up her womb.

   ^7And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the
   Lord, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.

   ^8Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and
   why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to
   thee than ten sons?

   ^9So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had
   drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of
   the Lord.

   ^10And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and
   wept sore.

   ^11And she vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt indeed
   look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not
   forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child,
   then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there
   shall no razor come upon his head.

   ^12And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the Lord, that
   Eli marked her mouth.

   ^13Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her
   voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.

   ^14And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy
   wine from thee.

   ^15And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a
   sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
   poured out my soul before the Lord.

   ^16Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the
   abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.

   ^17Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant
   thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

   ^18And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the
   woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

   ^19And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
   Lord, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew
   Hannah his wife; and the Lord remembered her.

   ^20Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after Hannah
   had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying,
   Because I have asked him of the Lord.

   ^21And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
   Lord the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

   ^22But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not go
   up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may
   appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever.

   ^23And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good;
   tarry until thou have weaned him; only the Lord establish his word. So
   the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.

   ^24And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three
   bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought him
   unto the house of the Lord in Shiloh: and the child was young.

   ^25And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.

   ^26And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the
   woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the Lord.

   ^27For this child I prayed; and the Lord hath given me my petition
   which I asked of him:

   ^28Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long as he liveth he
   shall be lent to the Lord. And he worshipped the Lord there.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 2

   And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn
   is exalted in the Lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because
   I rejoice in thy salvation.

   ^2There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee:
   neither is there any rock like our God.

   ^3Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of your
   mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
   weighed.

   ^4The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
   girded with strength.

   ^5They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
   that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
   that hath many children is waxed feeble.

   ^6The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
   and bringeth up.

   ^7The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth
   up.

   ^8He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
   from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
   the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lord'S, and
   he hath set the world upon them.

   ^9He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent
   in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

   ^10The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven
   shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth;
   and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his
   anointed.

   ^11And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister
   unto the Lord before Eli the priest.

   ^12Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the Lord.

   ^13And the priests' custom with the people was, that, when any man
   offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in
   seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand;

   ^14And he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all
   that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did
   in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.

   ^15Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and said
   to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he
   will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

   ^16And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat
   presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
   answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will take
   it by force.

   ^17Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord:
   for men abhorred the offering of the Lord.

   ^18But Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a child, girded with a
   linen ephod.

   ^19Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
   from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
   yearly sacrifice.

   ^20And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The Lord give thee
   seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the Lord. And they
   went unto their own home.

   ^21And the Lord visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three
   sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the Lord.

   ^22Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
   Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
   the tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^23And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your
   evil dealings by all this people.

   ^24Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the
   Lord'S people to transgress.

   ^25If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a
   man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding
   they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord
   would slay them.

   ^26And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the Lord,
   and also with men.

   ^27And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith
   the Lord, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they
   were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house?

   ^28And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my
   priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod
   before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father all the
   offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?

   ^29Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have
   commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make
   yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my
   people?

   ^30Wherefore the Lord God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy
   house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but
   now the Lord saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will
   honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

   ^31Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of
   thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.

   ^32And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
   which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine
   house for ever.

   ^33And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar,
   shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the
   increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.

   ^34And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
   sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

   ^35And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to
   that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure
   house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

   ^36And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
   house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
   of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests'
   offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 3

   And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli. And the word
   of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

   ^2And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his
   place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see;

   ^3And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord, where the
   ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep;

   ^4That the Lord called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.

   ^5And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And
   he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.

   ^6And the Lord called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to
   Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered, I
   called not, my son; lie down again.

   ^7Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was the word of the
   Lord yet revealed unto him.

   ^8And the Lord called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and
   went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli
   perceived that the Lord had called the child.

   ^9Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he
   call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth.
   So Samuel went and lay down in his place.

   ^10And the Lord came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel,
   Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.

   ^11And the Lord said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at
   which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

   ^12In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have
   spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.

   ^13For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the
   iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
   he restrained them not.

   ^14And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity
   of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for
   ever.

   ^15And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house
   of the Lord. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.

   ^16Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered,
   Here am I.

   ^17And he said, What is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee? I
   pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if
   thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

   ^18And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he
   said, It is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good.

   ^19And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his
   words fall to the ground.

   ^20And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
   established to be a prophet of the Lord.

   ^21And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh: for the Lord revealed himself
   to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 4

   And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against
   the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and the
   Philistines pitched in Aphek.

   ^2And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and when
   they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines: and they
   slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

   ^3And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel
   said, Wherefore hath the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines?
   Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us,
   that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our
   enemies.

   ^4So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the
   ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth between the
   cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there
   with the ark of the covenant of God.

   ^5And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all
   Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

   ^6And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
   What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews?
   And they understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the camp.

   ^7And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the
   camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a thing
   heretofore.

   ^8Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
   Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues
   in the wilderness.

   ^9Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be
   not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
   yourselves like men, and fight.

   ^10And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled
   every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
   there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

   ^11And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
   Phinehas, were slain.

   ^12And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh
   the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.

   ^13And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching:
   for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into
   the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

   ^14And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth
   the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.

   ^15Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim, that
   he could not see.

   ^16And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and I
   fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son?

   ^17And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the
   Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
   people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the
   ark of God is taken.

   ^18And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he
   fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck
   brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged
   Israel forty years.

   ^19And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be
   delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was
   taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
   herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

   ^20And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
   unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not,
   neither did she regard it.

   ^21And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed from
   Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in
   law and her husband.

   ^22And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God
   is taken.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 5

   And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Ebenezer
   unto Ashdod.

   ^2When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the
   house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

   ^3And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was
   fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the Lord. And they
   took Dagon, and set him in his place again.

   ^4And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was
   fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the Lord; and the
   head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
   threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.

   ^5Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
   Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.

   ^6But the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he
   destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the coasts
   thereof.

   ^7And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of
   the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon
   us, and upon Dagon our god.

   ^8They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines
   unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of
   Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried
   about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about
   thither.

   ^9And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the
   Lord was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote
   the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods in
   their secret parts.

   ^10Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as
   the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying,
   They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us
   and our people.

   ^11So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines,
   and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again
   to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a
   deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of God was very
   heavy there.

   ^12And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry
   of the city went up to heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 6

   And the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines seven
   months.

   ^2And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying,
   What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? tell us wherewith we shall
   send it to his place.

   ^3And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it
   not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
   shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
   removed from you.

   ^4Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall
   return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden
   mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one
   plague was on you all, and on your lords.

   ^5Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your
   mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel:
   peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your
   gods, and from off your land.

   ^6Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
   hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did
   they not let the people go, and they departed?

   ^7Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which
   there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
   calves home from them:

   ^8And take the ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart; and put the
   jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespass offering, in a
   coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.

   ^9And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh,
   then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know
   that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that happened to
   us.

   ^10And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the
   cart, and shut up their calves at home:

   ^11And they laid the ark of the Lord upon the cart, and the coffer with
   the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.

   ^12And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and
   went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
   the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went
   after them unto the border of Bethshemesh.

   ^13And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
   valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to
   see it.

   ^14And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and stood
   there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of the
   cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the Lord.

   ^15And the Levites took down the ark of the Lord, and the coffer that
   was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great
   stone: and the men of Beth- shemesh offered burnt offerings and
   sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the Lord.

   ^16And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they
   returned to Ekron the same day.

   ^17And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for
   a trespass offering unto the Lord; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for
   Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;

   ^18And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of
   the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and
   of country villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they
   set down the ark of the Lord: which stone remaineth unto this day in
   the field of Joshua, the Bethshemite.

   ^19And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into
   the ark of the Lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
   threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the Lord had
   smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

   ^20And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this
   holy Lord God? and to whom shall he go up from us?

   ^21And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim,
   saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the Lord; come ye
   down, and fetch it up to you.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 7

   And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the Lord,
   and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified
   Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the Lord.

   ^2And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that the
   time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel
   lamented after the Lord.

   ^3And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
   return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange
   gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
   Lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
   the Philistines.

   ^4Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and
   served the Lord only.

   ^5And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you
   unto the Lord.

   ^6And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it
   out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have
   sinned against the Lord. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in
   Mizpeh.

   ^7And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were
   gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up
   against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were
   afraid of the Philistines.

   ^8And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the
   Lord our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
   Philistines.

   ^9And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt offering
   wholly unto the Lord: and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel; and
   the Lord heard him.

   ^10And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines
   drew near to battle against Israel: but the Lord thundered with a great
   thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and
   they were smitten before Israel.

   ^11And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the
   Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar.

   ^12Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and
   called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the Lord helped
   us.

   ^13So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
   coast of Israel: and the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines
   all the days of Samuel.

   ^14And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were
   restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof
   did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was
   peace between Israel and the Amorites.

   ^15And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

   ^16And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and
   Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.

   ^17And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there he
   judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 8

   And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges
   over Israel.

   ^2Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second,
   Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba.

   ^3And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
   and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

   ^4Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came
   to Samuel unto Ramah,

   ^5And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy
   ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.

   ^6But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to
   judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord.

   ^7And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people
   in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but
   they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

   ^8According to all the works which they have done since the day that I
   brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
   forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

   ^9Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly
   unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over
   them.

   ^10And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked
   of him a king.

   ^11And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign
   over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
   chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
   chariots.

   ^12And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
   fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest,
   and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.

   ^13And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
   cooks, and to be bakers.

   ^14And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
   oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

   ^15And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and
   give to his officers, and to his servants.

   ^16And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your
   goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

   ^17He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.

   ^18And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall
   have chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you in that day.

   ^19Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and
   they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us;

   ^20That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may
   judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.

   ^21And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them
   in the ears of the Lord.

   ^22And the Lord said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them
   a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto
   his city.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 9

   Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel,
   the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite,
   a mighty man of power.

   ^2And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a
   goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier
   person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of
   the people.

   ^3And the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul
   his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the
   asses.

   ^4And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of
   Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of
   Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the
   Benjamites, but they found them not.

   ^5And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant
   that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring
   for the asses, and take thought for us.

   ^6And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God,
   and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass:
   now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we
   should go.

   ^7Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall we
   bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not
   a present to bring to the man of God: what have we?

   ^8And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at
   hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man
   of God, to tell us our way.

   ^9(Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he
   spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
   Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)

   ^10Then said Saul to his servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they
   went unto the city where the man of God was.

   ^11And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young maidens
   going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?

   ^12And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before you:
   make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
   sacrifice of the people to day in the high place:

   ^13As soon as ye be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him,
   before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat
   until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they
   eat that be bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye
   shall find him.

   ^14And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
   city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
   place.

   ^15Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came,
   saying,

   ^16To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of
   Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people
   Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines:
   for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.

   ^17And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, Behold the man
   whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

   ^18Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray
   thee, where the seer's house is.

   ^19And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before me
   unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow I
   will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

   ^20And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
   mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of
   Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?

   ^21And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of
   the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of
   the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?

   ^22And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the
   parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were
   bidden, which were about thirty persons.

   ^23And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee,
   of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.

   ^24And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and
   set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it
   before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee
   since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel
   that day.

   ^25And when they were come down from the high place into the city,
   Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.

   ^26And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
   day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that
   I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them,
   he and Samuel, abroad.

   ^27And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to
   Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand
   thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 10

   Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed
   him, and said, Is it not because the Lord hath anointed thee to be
   captain over his inheritance?

   ^2When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men
   by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they
   will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found:
   and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for
   you, saying, What shall I do for my son?

   ^3Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the
   plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to
   Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of
   bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:

   ^4And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread; which
   thou shalt receive of their hands.

   ^5After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison
   of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come
   thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming
   down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and
   a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:

   ^6And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt
   prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.

   ^7And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as
   occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.

   ^8And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come
   down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices
   of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee,
   and shew thee what thou shalt do.

   ^9And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel,
   God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass that day.

   ^10And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
   prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
   prophesied among them.

   ^11And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
   behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
   another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also
   among the prophets?

   ^12And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their
   father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?

   ^13And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high
   place.

   ^14And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye?
   And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
   where, we came to Samuel.

   ^15And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto
   you.

   ^16And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses were
   found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told
   him not.

   ^17And Samuel called the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh;

   ^18And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God of
   Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the
   hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them
   that oppressed you:

   ^19And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of
   all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him,
   Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before
   the Lord by your tribes, and by your thousands.

   ^20And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near,
   the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

   ^21When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
   families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was
   taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

   ^22Therefore they enquired of the Lord further, if the man should yet
   come thither. And the Lord answered, Behold, he hath hid himself among
   the stuff.

   ^23And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
   people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
   upward.

   ^24And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the Lord hath
   chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the
   people shouted, and said, God save the king.

   ^25Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it
   in a book, and laid it up before the Lord. And Samuel sent all the
   people away, every man to his house.

   ^26And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of
   men, whose hearts God had touched.

   ^27But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And
   they despised him, and brought him no presents. But he held his peace.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 11

   Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabeshgilead:
   and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us,
   and we will serve thee.

   ^2And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I make
   a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay
   it for a reproach upon all Israel.

   ^3And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days' respite,
   that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel: and then, if
   there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

   ^4Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in
   the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices, and
   wept.

   ^5And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul
   said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the
   tidings of the men of Jabesh.

   ^6And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and
   his anger was kindled greatly.

   ^7And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them
   throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying,
   Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be
   done unto his oxen. And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and
   they came out with one consent.

   ^8And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three
   hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

   ^9And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto
   the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot, ye
   shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men of
   Jabesh; and they were glad.

   ^10Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto
   you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

   ^11And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three
   companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
   watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came to
   pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were
   not left together.

   ^12And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul
   reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

   ^13And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day: for
   to day the Lord hath wrought salvation in Israel.

   ^14Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and
   renew the kingdom there.

   ^15And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king
   before the Lord in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
   peace offerings before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of
   Israel rejoiced greatly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 12

   And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your
   voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

   ^2And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and
   grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before
   you from my childhood unto this day.

   ^3Behold, here I am: witness against me before the Lord, and before his
   anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom
   have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
   received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it
   you.

   ^4And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither
   hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

   ^5And he said unto them, The Lord is witness against you, and his
   anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
   And they answered, He is witness.

   ^6And Samuel said unto the people, It is the Lord that advanced Moses
   and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.

   ^7Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the Lord
   of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your
   fathers.

   ^8When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the Lord,
   then the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers
   out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

   ^9And when they forgat the Lord their God, he sold them into the hand
   of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the
   Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought
   against them.

   ^10And they cried unto the Lord, and said, We have sinned, because we
   have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now
   deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

   ^11And the Lord sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel,
   and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye
   dwelled safe.

   ^12And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came
   against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when
   the Lord your God was your king.

   ^13Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have
   desired! and, behold, the Lord hath set a king over you.

   ^14If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not
   rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye and also
   the king that reigneth over you continue following the Lord your God:

   ^15But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the
   commandment of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against
   you, as it was against your fathers.

   ^16Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the Lord will do
   before your eyes.

   ^17Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and he
   shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
   wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in
   asking you a king.

   ^18So Samuel called unto the Lord; and the Lord sent thunder and rain
   that day: and all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.

   ^19And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the
   Lord thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this
   evil, to ask us a king.

   ^20And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this
   wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the
   Lord with all your heart;

   ^21And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things,
   which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are vain.

   ^22For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name's sake:
   because it hath pleased the Lord to make you his people.

   ^23Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in
   ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right
   way:

   ^24Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for
   consider how great things he hath done for you.

   ^25But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and
   your king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 13

   Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,

   ^2Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand
   were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a thousand were
   with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent
   every man to his tent.

   ^3And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba,
   and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout
   all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.

   ^4And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
   Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the
   Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.

   ^5And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
   Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people
   as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up,
   and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Beth- aven.

   ^6When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
   people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
   and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

   ^7And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and
   Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed
   him trembling.

   ^8And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had
   appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered
   from him.

   ^9And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
   offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.

   ^10And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering
   the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him,
   that he might salute him.

   ^11And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw
   that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within
   the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves
   together at Michmash;

   ^12Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to
   Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced myself
   therefore, and offered a burnt offering.

   ^13And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
   kept the commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: for
   now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.

   ^14But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a
   man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain
   over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the Lord
   commanded thee.

   ^15And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of
   Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him,
   about six hundred men.

   ^16And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
   with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in
   Michmash.

   ^17And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three
   companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto
   the land of Shual:

   ^18And another company turned the way to Bethhoron: and another company
   turned to the way of the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim
   toward the wilderness.

   ^19Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: for
   the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:

   ^20But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen
   every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

   ^21Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for
   the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

   ^22So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
   sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
   Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there
   found.

   ^23And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
   Michmash.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 14

   Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto
   the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the
   Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. But he told not his
   father.

   ^2And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate
   tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him were about
   six hundred men;

   ^3And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas,
   the son of Eli, the Lord'S priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the
   people knew not that Jonathan was gone.

   ^4And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto
   the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and
   a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and
   the name of the other Seneh.

   ^5The forefront of the one was situate northward over against Michmash,
   and the other southward over against Gibeah.

   ^6And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and
   let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that
   the Lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the Lord to
   save by many or by few.

   ^7And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine heart:
   turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.

   ^8Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and we
   will discover ourselves unto them.

   ^9If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we will
   stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

   ^10But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for the
   Lord hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign unto
   us.

   ^11And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
   Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth
   out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

   ^12And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer,
   and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan
   said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the Lord hath
   delivered them into the hand of Israel.

   ^13And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his
   armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his
   armourbearer slew after him.

   ^14And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made,
   was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a
   yoke of oxen might plow.

   ^15And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the
   people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the
   earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

   ^16And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, behold,
   the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another.

   ^17Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now, and
   see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan
   and his armourbearer were not there.

   ^18And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark
   of God was at that time with the children of Israel.

   ^19And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the
   noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased:
   and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.

   ^20And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled themselves,
   and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's sword was against
   his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

   ^21Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that
   time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
   about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with
   Saul and Jonathan.

   ^22Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount
   Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also
   followed hard after them in the battle.

   ^23So the Lord saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over unto
   Bethaven.

   ^24And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured
   the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until
   evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people
   tasted any food.

   ^25And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey upon
   the ground.

   ^26And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
   dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
   the oath.

   ^27But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the
   oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand,
   and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his
   eyes were enlightened.

   ^28Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly
   charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth
   any food this day. And the people were faint.

   ^29Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray
   you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of
   this honey.

   ^30How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the
   spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a
   much greater slaughter among the Philistines?

   ^31And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon:
   and the people were very faint.

   ^32And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and
   calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with
   the blood.

   ^33Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the
   Lord, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have
   transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

   ^34And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto
   them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and
   slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the Lord in eating with
   the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that
   night, and slew them there.

   ^35And Saul built an altar unto the Lord: the same was the first altar
   that he built unto the Lord.

   ^36And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and
   spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them.
   And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said the
   priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.

   ^37And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the
   Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he
   answered him not that day.

   ^38And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people: and
   know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

   ^39For, as the Lord liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in
   Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all
   the people that answered him.

   ^40Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan
   my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do
   what seemeth good unto thee.

   ^41Therefore Saul said unto the Lord God of Israel, Give a perfect lot.
   And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

   ^42And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And
   Jonathan was taken.

   ^43Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And
   Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the
   end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.

   ^44And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely
   die, Jonathan.

   ^45And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought
   this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the Lord liveth, there
   shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought
   with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.

   ^46Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the
   Philistines went to their own place.

   ^47So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his
   enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon,
   and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the
   Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

   ^48And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered
   Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

   ^49Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua: and
   the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn
   Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:

   ^50And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz:
   and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner,
   Saul's uncle.

   ^51And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was the
   son of Abiel.

   ^52And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul:
   and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto
   him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 15

   Samuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king
   over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice
   of the words of the Lord.

   ^2Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to
   Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
   Egypt.

   ^3Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and
   spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox
   and sheep, camel and ass.

   ^4And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim,
   two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.

   ^5And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

   ^6And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among
   the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindness to
   all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the
   Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.

   ^7And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur,
   that is over against Egypt.

   ^8And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly
   destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

   ^9But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and
   of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good,
   and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and
   refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

   ^10Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying,

   ^11It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned
   back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it
   grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the Lord all night.

   ^12And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told
   Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
   place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.

   ^13And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of
   the Lord: I have performed the commandment of the Lord.

   ^14And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
   mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?

   ^15And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the
   people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto
   the Lord thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

   ^16Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord
   hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.

   ^17And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou
   not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee
   king over Israel?

   ^18And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly
   destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they
   be consumed.

   ^19Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the Lord, but didst
   fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the Lord?

   ^20And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord,
   and have gone the way which the Lord sent me, and have brought Agag the
   king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.

   ^21But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the
   things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the
   Lord thy God in Gilgal.

   ^22And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings
   and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is
   better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

   ^23For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
   iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord,
   he hath also rejected thee from being king.

   ^24And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed
   the commandment of the Lord, and thy words: because I feared the
   people, and obeyed their voice.

   ^25Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me,
   that I may worship the Lord.

   ^26And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
   hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee
   from being king over Israel.

   ^27And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt
   of his mantle, and it rent.

   ^28And Samuel said unto him, The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel
   from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is
   better than thou.

   ^29And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is
   not a man, that he should repent.

   ^30Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee, before
   the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me,
   that I may worship the Lord thy God.

   ^31So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the Lord.

   ^32Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the
   Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely
   the bitterness of death is past.

   ^33And Samuel said, As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall
   thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces
   before the Lord in Gilgal.

   ^34Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah
   of Saul.

   ^35And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death:
   nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the Lord repented that he had
   made Saul king over Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 16

   And the Lord said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
   seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn
   with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I
   have provided me a king among his sons.

   ^2And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me. And
   the Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
   sacrifice to the Lord.

   ^3And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou shalt
   do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.

   ^4And Samuel did that which the Lord spake, and came to Bethlehem. And
   the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou
   peaceably?

   ^5And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord:
   sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he
   sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.

   ^6And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab,
   and said, Surely the Lord'S anointed is before him.

   ^7But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the
   height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth
   not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the
   Lord looketh on the heart.

   ^8Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he
   said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this.

   ^9Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the
   Lord chosen this.

   ^10Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And
   Samuel said unto Jesse, The Lord hath not chosen these.

   ^11And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he said,
   There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep.
   And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit
   down till he come hither.

   ^12And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a
   beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the Lord said, Arise,
   anoint him: for this is he.

   ^13Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of
   his brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day
   forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.

   ^14But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit
   from the Lord troubled him.

   ^15And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from
   God troubleth thee.

   ^16Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
   seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
   to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play
   with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

   ^17And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play
   well, and bring him to me.

   ^18Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a
   son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty
   valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely
   person, and the Lord is with him.

   ^19Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David
   thy son, which is with the sheep.

   ^20And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a
   kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.

   ^21And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
   greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

   ^22And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before
   me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

   ^23And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul,
   that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
   refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 17

   Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were
   gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched
   between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.

   ^2And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by
   the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the
   Philistines.

   ^3And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel
   stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between
   them.

   ^4And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
   named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

   ^5And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed with a
   coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of
   brass.

   ^6And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
   between his shoulders.

   ^7And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's
   head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went
   before him.

   ^8And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them,
   Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine,
   and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come
   down to me.

   ^9If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your
   servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be
   our servants, and serve us.

   ^10And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give
   me a man, that we may fight together.

   ^11When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they
   were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

   ^12Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose
   name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men for
   an old man in the days of Saul.

   ^13And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
   battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
   Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.

   ^14And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.

   ^15But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep at
   Bethlehem.

   ^16And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
   himself forty days.

   ^17And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an
   ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
   to thy brethren;

   ^18And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and
   look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

   ^19Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of
   Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

   ^20And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a
   keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to
   the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for
   the battle.

   ^21For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army
   against army.

   ^22And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
   carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

   ^23And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the
   Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the
   Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard
   them.

   ^24And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and
   were sore afraid.

   ^25And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up?
   surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the man who
   killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give
   him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.

   ^26And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be
   done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the
   reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he
   should defy the armies of the living God?

   ^27And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it
   be done to the man that killeth him.

   ^28And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and
   Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou
   down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
   wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
   thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

   ^29And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?

   ^30And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
   manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

   ^31And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed them
   before Saul: and he sent for him.

   ^32And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy
   servant will go and fight with this Philistine.

   ^33And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this
   Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of
   war from his youth.

   ^34And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep, and
   there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:

   ^35And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his
   mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and
   smote him, and slew him.

   ^36Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised
   Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of
   the living God.

   ^37David said moreover, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of
   the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the
   hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the Lord be
   with thee.

   ^38And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass
   upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

   ^39And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go;
   for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with
   these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.

   ^40And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones
   out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had, even
   in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the
   Philistine.

   ^41And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man
   that bare the shield went before him.

   ^42And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained
   him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.

   ^43And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to
   me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.

   ^44And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy
   flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

   ^45Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword,
   and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of
   the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast
   defied.

   ^46This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite
   thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of
   the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to
   the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is
   a God in Israel.

   ^47And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword
   and spear: for the battle is the Lord'S, and he will give you into our
   hands.

   ^48And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew
   nigh to meet David, that David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet
   the Philistine.

   ^49And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
   slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk
   into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

   ^50So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
   stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
   in the hand of David.

   ^51Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his
   sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off
   his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was
   dead, they fled.

   ^52And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued
   the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of
   Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to
   Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.

   ^53And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
   Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

   ^54And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
   Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

   ^55And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said
   unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth?
   And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.

   ^56And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

   ^57And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner
   took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine
   in his hand.

   ^58And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And David
   answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 18

   And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul,
   that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan
   loved him as his own soul.

   ^2And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his
   father's house.

   ^3Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his
   own soul.

   ^4And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave
   it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and
   to his girdle.

   ^5And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself
   wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in
   the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.

   ^6And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the
   slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of
   Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy,
   and with instruments of musick.

   ^7And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul
   hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.

   ^8And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said,
   They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
   ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?

   ^9And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.

   ^10And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God
   came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David
   played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
   Saul's hand.

   ^11And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to
   the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.

   ^12And Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, and was
   departed from Saul.

   ^13Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a
   thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

   ^14And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the Lord was
   with him.

   ^15Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was
   afraid of him.

   ^16But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came
   in before them.

   ^17And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I
   give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord'S
   battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand
   of the Philistines be upon him.

   ^18And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my
   father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?

   ^19But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should
   have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the
   Meholathite to wife.

   ^20And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the
   thing pleased him.

   ^21And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him,
   and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul
   said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the
   twain.

   ^22And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David
   secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
   servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

   ^23And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And
   David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
   seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?

   ^24And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake
   David.

   ^25And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any
   dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of
   the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of
   the Philistines.

   ^26And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well
   to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

   ^27Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
   Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and
   they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
   son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.

   ^28And Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David, and that Michal
   Saul's daughter loved him.

   ^29And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David's
   enemy continually.

   ^30Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass,
   after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all
   the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 19

   And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they
   should kill David.

   ^2But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told
   David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now therefore, I
   pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and abide in a
   secret place, and hide thyself:

   ^3And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou
   art, and I will commune with my father of thee; and what I see, that I
   will tell thee.

   ^4And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto
   him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because
   he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to
   thee-ward very good:

   ^5For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the
   Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou sawest it, and
   didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to
   slay David without a cause?

   ^6And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the
   Lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

   ^7And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those things.
   And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in
   times past.

   ^8And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the
   Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
   him.

   ^9And the evil spirit from the Lord was upon Saul, as he sat in his
   house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.

   ^10And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the javelin;
   but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the javelin
   into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.

   ^11Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to
   slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying, If
   thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

   ^12So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled,
   and escaped.

   ^13And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow
   of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

   ^14And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.

   ^15And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring him
   up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.

   ^16And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image in
   the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

   ^17And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent
   away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said
   unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?

   ^18So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told
   him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in
   Naioth.

   ^19And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.

   ^20And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the
   company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed
   over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they
   also prophesied.

   ^21And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they
   prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and
   they prophesied also.

   ^22Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in
   Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said,
   Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.

   ^23And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was
   upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth
   in Ramah.

   ^24And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel
   in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that night.
   Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 20

   And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan,
   What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
   father, that he seeketh my life?

   ^2And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my
   father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will shew it
   me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so.

   ^3And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that
   I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know
   this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul
   liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

   ^4Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will
   even do it for thee.

   ^5And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and
   I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I
   may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

   ^6If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave
   of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a yearly
   sacrifice there for all the family.

   ^7If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he
   be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.

   ^8Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
   brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with thee:
   notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
   shouldest thou bring me to thy father?

   ^9And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: for if I knew certainly that
   evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I
   tell it thee?

   ^10Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy
   father answer thee roughly?

   ^11And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the
   field. And they went out both of them into the field.

   ^12And Jonathan said unto David, O Lord God of Israel, when I have
   sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
   behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee,
   and shew it thee;

   ^13The Lord do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father
   to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and send thee away, that
   thou mayest go in peace: and the Lord be with thee, as he hath been
   with my father.

   ^14And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of the
   Lord, that I die not:

   ^15But also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever:
   no, not when the Lord hath cut off the enemies of David every one from
   the face of the earth.

   ^16So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let the
   Lord even require it at the hand of David's enemies.

   ^17And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him: for
   he loved him as he loved his own soul.

   ^18Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou
   shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

   ^19And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
   quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
   business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.

   ^20And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I shot
   at a mark.

   ^21And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If
   I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of
   thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
   hurt; as the Lord liveth.

   ^22But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are beyond
   thee; go thy way: for the Lord hath sent thee away.

   ^23And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold,
   the Lord be between thee and me for ever.

   ^24So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was come,
   the king sat him down to eat meat.

   ^25And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat
   by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and
   David's place was empty.

   ^26Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
   Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

   ^27And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the
   month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his
   son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday,
   nor to day?

   ^28And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go
   to Bethlehem:

   ^29And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice
   in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now,
   if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and
   see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

   ^30Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto
   him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that thou
   hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
   confusion of thy mother's nakedness?

   ^31For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt
   not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him
   unto me, for he shall surely die.

   ^32And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore
   shall he be slain? what hath he done?

   ^33And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew
   that it was determined of his father to slay David.

   ^34So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
   meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because
   his father had done him shame.

   ^35And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the
   field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.

   ^36And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I
   shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

   ^37And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan
   had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the arrow
   beyond thee?

   ^38And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And
   Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.

   ^39But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the
   matter.

   ^40And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go,
   carry them to the city.

   ^41And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward
   the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three
   times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until
   David exceeded.

   ^42And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn
   both of us in the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and
   thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and
   departed: and Jonathan went into the city.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 21

   Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was
   afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone,
   and no man with thee?

   ^2And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me
   a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the
   business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I
   have appointed my servants to such and such a place.

   ^3Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of bread
   in mine hand, or what there is present.

   ^4And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread
   under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have
   kept themselves at least from women.

   ^5And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women
   have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out, and
   the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a manner
   common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

   ^6So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread there
   but the shewbread, that was taken from before the Lord, to put hot
   bread in the day when it was taken away.

   ^7Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day,
   detained before the Lord; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the
   chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.

   ^8And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand
   spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with
   me, because the king's business required haste.

   ^9And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou
   slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth
   behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no
   other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it
   me.

   ^10And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to
   Achish the king of Gath.

   ^11And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the king
   of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying,
   Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?

   ^12And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of
   Achish the king of Gath.

   ^13And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in
   their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his
   spittle fall down upon his beard.

   ^14Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad:
   wherefore then have ye brought him to me?

   ^15Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the
   mad man in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 22

   David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and
   when his brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down
   thither to him.

   ^2And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt,
   and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and
   he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four
   hundred men.

   ^3And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of
   Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with
   you, till I know what God will do for me.

   ^4And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him
   all the while that David was in the hold.

   ^5And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart,
   and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into
   the forest of Hareth.

   ^6When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with
   him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his spear
   in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;)

   ^7Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye
   Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and
   vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of
   hundreds;

   ^8That all of you have conspired against me, and there is none that
   sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jesse, and
   there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my
   son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this
   day?

   ^9Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of
   Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the
   son of Ahitub.

   ^10And he enquired of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and gave
   him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.

   ^11Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub,
   and all his father's house, the priests that were in Nob: and they came
   all of them to the king.

   ^12And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I
   am, my lord.

   ^13And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and
   the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and
   hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in
   wait, as at this day?

   ^14Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful
   among all thy servants as David, which is the king's son in law, and
   goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?

   ^15Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let
   not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of
   my father: for thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more.

   ^16And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all
   thy father's house.

   ^17And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn, and
   slay the priests of the Lord; because their hand also is with David,
   and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the
   servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the
   priests of the Lord.

   ^18And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And
   Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that
   day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

   ^19And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
   sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses,
   and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

   ^20And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar,
   escaped, and fled after David.

   ^21And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the Lord'S priests.

   ^22And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the
   Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned
   the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

   ^23Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh
   thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 23

   Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against
   Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

   ^2Therefore David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite
   these Philistines? And the Lord said unto David, Go, and smite the
   Philistines, and save Keilah.

   ^3And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah:
   how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the
   Philistines?

   ^4Then David enquired of the Lord yet again. And the Lord answered him
   and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines
   into thine hand.

   ^5So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines,
   and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter.
   So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.

   ^6And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David
   to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

   ^7And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said,
   God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering
   into a town that hath gates and bars.

   ^8And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to Keilah,
   to besiege David and his men.

   ^9And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and
   he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.

   ^10Then said David, O Lord God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly
   heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my
   sake.

   ^11Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come
   down, as thy servant hath heard? O Lord God of Israel, I beseech thee,
   tell thy servant. And the Lord said, He will come down.

   ^12Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into
   the hand of Saul? And the Lord said, They will deliver thee up.

   ^13Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
   departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it
   was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go
   forth.

   ^14And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in a
   mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but
   God delivered him not into his hand.

   ^15And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David was
   in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.

   ^16And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wood, and
   strengthened his hand in God.

   ^17And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shall
   not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next
   unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.

   ^18And they two made a covenant before the Lord: and David abode in the
   wood, and Jonathan went to his house.

   ^19Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David
   hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
   Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?

   ^20Now therefore, O king, come down according to all the desire of thy
   soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's
   hand.

   ^21And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the Lord; for ye have compassion on
   me.

   ^22Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his
   haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
   dealeth very subtilly.

   ^23See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he
   hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will
   go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I
   will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah.

   ^24And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men
   were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon.

   ^25Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David:
   wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
   Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the
   wilderness of Maon.

   ^26And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on
   that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of
   Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to
   take them.

   ^27But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come;
   for the Philistines have invaded the land.

   ^28Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against
   the Philistines: therefore they called that place Selahammahlekoth.

   ^29And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at Engedi.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 24

   And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the
   Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the
   wilderness of Engedi.

   ^2Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went
   to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

   ^3And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul
   went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides
   of the cave.

   ^4And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the Lord
   said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand,
   that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David
   arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily.

   ^5And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because
   he had cut off Saul's skirt.

   ^6And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing
   unto my master, the Lord'S anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against
   him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.

   ^7So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not
   to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his
   way.

   ^8David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after
   Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David
   stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

   ^9And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying,
   Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?

   ^10Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the Lord had
   delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kill
   thee: but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine
   hand against my lord; for he is the Lord'S anointed.

   ^11Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand:
   for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know
   thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand,
   and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take
   it.

   ^12The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee:
   but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

   ^13As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the
   wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

   ^14After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou
   pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

   ^15The Lord therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and see,
   and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

   ^16And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these
   words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And
   Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

   ^17And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast
   rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.

   ^18And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me:
   forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou
   killedst me not.

   ^19For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore
   the Lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.

   ^20And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
   that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.

   ^21Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that thou wilt not cut off
   my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
   father's house.

   ^22And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men
   gat them up unto the hold.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 25

   And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and
   lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose,
   and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

   ^2And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel; and
   the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand
   goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.

   ^3Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail:
   and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
   countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he
   was of the house of Caleb.

   ^4And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.

   ^5And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men,
   Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:

   ^6And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both
   to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that thou
   hast.

   ^7And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which
   were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing unto
   them, all the while they were in Carmel.

   ^8Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the young
   men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give, I pray
   thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son
   David.

   ^9And when David's young men came, they spake to Nabal according to all
   those words in the name of David, and ceased.

   ^10And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? and who
   is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break away
   every man from his master.

   ^11Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have
   killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence
   they be?

   ^12So David's young men turned their way, and went again, and came and
   told him all those sayings.

   ^13And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And
   they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword:
   and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred
   abode by the stuff.

   ^14But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold,
   David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and
   he railed on them.

   ^15But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither
   missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we
   were in the fields:

   ^16They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we
   were with them keeping the sheep.

   ^17Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is
   determined against our master, and against all his household: for he is
   such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

   ^18Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two
   bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
   parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes
   of figs, and laid them on asses.

   ^19And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come
   after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.

   ^20And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
   covert of the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against
   her; and she met them.

   ^21Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow
   hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
   pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

   ^22So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all
   that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the
   wall.

   ^23And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and
   fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,

   ^24And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this
   iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine
   audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

   ^25Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal:
   for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him:
   but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst
   send.

   ^26Now therefore, my lord, as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth,
   seeing the Lord hath withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and
   from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and
   they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.

   ^27And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
   lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

   ^28I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the Lord
   will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the
   battles of the Lord, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.

   ^29Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the
   soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy
   God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of
   the middle of a sling.

   ^30And it shall come to pass, when the Lord shall have done to my lord
   according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and
   shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;

   ^31That this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my
   lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath
   avenged himself: but when the Lord shall have dealt well with my lord,
   then remember thine handmaid.

   ^32And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which
   sent thee this day to meet me:

   ^33And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me
   this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine
   own hand.

   ^34For in very deed, as the Lord God of Israel liveth, which hath kept
   me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet
   me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any
   that pisseth against the wall.

   ^35So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and
   said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to
   thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

   ^36And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
   house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was merry within
   him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or
   more, until the morning light.

   ^37But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of
   Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died
   within him, and he became as a stone.

   ^38And it came to pass about ten days after, that the Lord smote Nabal,
   that he died.

   ^39And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the
   Lord, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of
   Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the Lord hath returned
   the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed
   with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.

   ^40And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they
   spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to
   wife.

   ^41And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said,
   Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
   servants of my lord.

   ^42And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five
   damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers
   of David, and became his wife.

   ^43David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of them
   his wives.

   ^44But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the
   son of Laish, which was of Gallim.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 26

   And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide
   himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?

   ^2Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having
   three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the
   wilderness of Ziph.

   ^3And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon,
   by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul
   came after him into the wilderness.

   ^4David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in
   very deed.

   ^5And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and
   David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the
   captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched
   round about him.

   ^6Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai
   the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me
   to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.

   ^7So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul
   lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at
   his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.

   ^8Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine
   hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the
   spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second
   time.

   ^9And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth
   his hand against the Lord'S anointed, and be guiltless?

   ^10David said furthermore, As the Lord liveth, the Lord shall smite
   him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
   perish.

   ^11The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the
   Lord'S anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at
   his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

   ^12So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster;
   and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked:
   for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen
   upon them.

   ^13Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an
   hill afar off; a great space being between them:

   ^14And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying,
   Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou
   that criest to the king?

   ^15And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like
   to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king?
   for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.

   ^16This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the Lord liveth, ye
   are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the Lord'S
   anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water
   that was at his bolster.

   ^17And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son
   David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.

   ^18And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant?
   for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?

   ^19Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of
   his servant. If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him
   accept an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they
   before the Lord; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in
   the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other gods.

   ^20Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of
   the Lord: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when
   one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

   ^21Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no
   more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day:
   behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

   ^22And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of
   the young men come over and fetch it.

   ^23The Lord render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness:
   for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not
   stretch forth mine hand against the Lord'S anointed.

   ^24And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so
   let my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver
   me out of all tribulation.

   ^25Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt
   both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on
   his way, and Saul returned to his place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 27

   And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of
   Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape
   into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek
   me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.

   ^2And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
   were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.

   ^3And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with
   his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
   and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.

   ^4And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no
   more again for him.

   ^5And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes,
   let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell
   there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?

   ^6Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth
   unto the kings of Judah unto this day.

   ^7And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a
   full year and four months.

   ^8And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the
   Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the
   inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of
   Egypt.

   ^9And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and
   took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and
   the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.

   ^10And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said,
   Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites,
   and against the south of the Kenites.

   ^11And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to
   Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so
   will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the
   Philistines.

   ^12And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel
   utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 28

   And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their
   armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto
   David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle,
   thou and thy men.

   ^2And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can
   do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine
   head for ever.

   ^3Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him
   in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had
   familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

   ^4And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
   pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they
   pitched in Gilboa.

   ^5And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his
   heart greatly trembled.

   ^6And when Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not,
   neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.

   ^7Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a
   familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his
   servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
   spirit at Endor.

   ^8And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went,
   and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said,
   I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him
   up, whom I shall name unto thee.

   ^9And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath
   done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
   wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
   life, to cause me to die?

   ^10And Saul sware to her by the Lord, saying, As the Lord liveth, there
   shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.

   ^11Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said,
   Bring me up Samuel.

   ^12And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the
   woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art
   Saul.

   ^13And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And
   the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.

   ^14And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man
   cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it
   was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed
   himself.

   ^15And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me
   up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make
   war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more,
   neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that
   thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.

   ^16Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
   Lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?

   ^17And the Lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the Lord hath
   rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even
   to David:

   ^18Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his
   fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the Lord done this thing unto
   thee this day.

   ^19Moreover the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand
   of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me:
   the Lord also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the
   Philistines.

   ^20Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
   afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in
   him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

   ^21And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and
   said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have
   put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou
   spakest unto me.

   ^22Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
   thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
   that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

   ^23But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together
   with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he
   arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

   ^24And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
   killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
   bread thereof:

   ^25And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they
   did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 29

   Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and
   the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.

   ^2And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
   thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.

   ^3Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here?
   And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David,
   the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these
   days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell
   unto me unto this day?

   ^4And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the
   princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that
   he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him
   not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to
   us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should
   it not be with the heads of these men?

   ^5Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances,
   saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?

   ^6Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the Lord
   liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in
   with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in
   thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless
   the lords favour thee not.

   ^7Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the
   lords of the Philistines.

   ^8And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou
   found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day,
   that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?

   ^9And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in
   my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the
   Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.

   ^10Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's
   servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the
   morning, and have light, depart.

   ^11So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to
   return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to
   Jezreel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 30

   And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the
   third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and
   smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;

   ^2And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not
   any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their
   way.

   ^3So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned
   with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were
   taken captives.

   ^4Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice
   and wept, until they had no more power to weep.

   ^5And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
   and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.

   ^6And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning
   him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his
   sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the Lord
   his God.

   ^7And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thee,
   bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to
   David.

   ^8And David enquired at the Lord, saying, Shall I pursue after this
   troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou
   shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.

   ^9So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and
   came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.

   ^10But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode
   behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook
   Besor.

   ^11And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David,
   and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;

   ^12And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of
   raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he
   had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.

   ^13And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art
   thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite;
   and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.

   ^14We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the
   coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we
   burned Ziklag with fire.

   ^15And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And
   he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor
   deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to
   this company.

   ^16And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad
   upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all
   the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines,
   and out of the land of Judah.

   ^17And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the
   next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young
   men, which rode upon camels, and fled.

   ^18And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and
   David rescued his two wives.

   ^19And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great,
   neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had
   taken to them: David recovered all.

   ^20And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave before
   those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.

   ^21And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they
   could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook
   Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that
   were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them.

   ^22Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that
   went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not
   give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man
   his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.

   ^23Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which
   the Lord hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the
   company that came against us into our hand.

   ^24For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is
   that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by
   the stuff: they shall part alike.

   ^25And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and
   an ordinance for Israel unto this day.

   ^26And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders
   of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the
   spoil of the enemies of the Lord;

   ^27To them which were in Bethel, and to them which were in south
   Ramoth, and to them which were in Jattir,

   ^28And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth,
   and to them which were in Eshtemoa,

   ^29And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the
   cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of
   the Kenites,

   ^30And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in
   Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach,

   ^31And to them which were in Hebron, and to all the places where David
   himself and his men were wont to haunt.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 31

   Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled
   from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

   ^2And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and
   the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua, Saul's
   sons.

   ^3And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and
   he was sore wounded of the archers.

   ^4Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me
   through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through,
   and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid.
   Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.

   ^5And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise
   upon his sword, and died with him.

   ^6So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his
   men, that same day together.

   ^7And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley,
   and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel
   fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities,
   and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

   ^8And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip
   the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount
   Gilboa.

   ^9And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into
   the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of
   their idols, and among the people.

   ^10And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened
   his body to the wall of Bethshan.

   ^11And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the
   Philistines had done to Saul;

   ^12All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of
   Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethshan, and came to
   Jabesh, and burnt them there.

   ^13And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh,
   and fasted seven days.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Second Book of

Samuel

  Otherwise Called the Second Book of the Kings
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 1

   Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned
   from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in
   Ziklag;

   ^2It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out
   of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head:
   and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and
   did obeisance.

   ^3And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto
   him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.

   ^4And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me.
   And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of
   the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are
   dead also.

   ^5And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou
   that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?

   ^6And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon
   mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots
   and horsemen followed hard after him.

   ^7And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I
   answered, Here am I.

   ^8And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an
   Amalekite.

   ^9He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for
   anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.

   ^10So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could
   not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon
   his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them
   hither unto my lord.

   ^11Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all
   the men that were with him:

   ^12And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for
   Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of
   Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.

   ^13And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou?
   And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.

   ^14And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth
   thine hand to destroy the Lord'S anointed?

   ^15And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall
   upon him. And he smote him that he died.

   ^16And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth
   hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lord'S anointed.

   ^17And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan
   his son:

   ^18(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow:
   behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)

   ^19The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the
   mighty fallen!

   ^20Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest
   the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the
   uncircumcised triumph.

   ^21Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be
   rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the
   mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not
   been anointed with oil.

   ^22From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of
   Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

   ^23Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in
   their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they
   were stronger than lions.

   ^24Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet,
   with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

   ^25How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan,
   thou wast slain in thine high places.

   ^26I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast
   thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
   women.

   ^27How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 2

   And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the Lord,
   saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the Lord
   said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he
   said, Unto Hebron.

   ^2So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the
   Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite.

   ^3And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his
   household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.

   ^4And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over
   the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of
   Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul.

   ^5And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said unto
   them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye have shewed this kindness unto
   your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.

   ^6And now the Lord shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will
   requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

   ^7Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for
   your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me
   king over them.

   ^8But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the
   son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;

   ^9And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over
   Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

   ^10Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign
   over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed
   David.

   ^11And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah
   was seven years and six months.

   ^12And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son of
   Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

   ^13And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out,
   and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on
   the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.

   ^14And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before
   us. And Joab said, Let them arise.

   ^15Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which
   pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of
   David.

   ^16And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his
   sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down together: wherefore that
   place was called Helkathhazzurim, which is in Gibeon.

   ^17And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and
   the men of Israel, before the servants of David.

   ^18And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and
   Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.

   ^19And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the
   right hand nor to the left from following Abner.

   ^20Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he
   answered, I am.

   ^21And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy
   left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his
   armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.

   ^22And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me:
   wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up
   my face to Joab thy brother?

   ^23Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder
   end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out
   behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it
   came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down
   and died stood still.

   ^24Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down
   when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the
   way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

   ^25And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after
   Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.

   ^26Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for
   ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
   how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from
   following their brethren?

   ^27And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then
   in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his
   brother.

   ^28So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued
   after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.

   ^29And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and
   passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to
   Mahanaim.

   ^30And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all
   the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and
   Asahel.

   ^31But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's
   men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.

   ^32And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his
   father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night,
   and they came to Hebron at break of day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 3

   Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of
   David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul
   waxed weaker and weaker.

   ^2And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon,
   of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;

   ^3And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite;
   and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of
   Geshur;

   ^4And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth,
   Shephatiah the son of Abital;

   ^5And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These were born to
   David in Hebron.

   ^6And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul
   and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of
   Saul.

   ^7And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of
   Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my
   father's concubine?

   ^8Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I
   a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the
   house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have
   not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day
   with a fault concerning this woman?

   ^9So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the Lord hath sworn to
   David, even so I do to him;

   ^10To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the
   throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.

   ^11And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.

   ^12And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is
   the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand
   shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.

   ^13And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I
   require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first
   bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see my face.

   ^14And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver
   me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of
   the Philistines.

   ^15And Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from
   Phaltiel the son of Laish.

   ^16And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim.
   Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.

   ^17And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye
   sought for David in times past to be king over you:

   ^18Now then do it: for the Lord hath spoken of David, saying, By the
   hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand
   of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.

   ^19And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to
   speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel,
   and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.

   ^20So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David
   made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.

   ^21And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all
   Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee,
   and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And
   David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

   ^22And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a
   troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with
   David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.

   ^23When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told
   Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent
   him away, and he is gone in peace.

   ^24Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold,
   Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is
   quite gone?

   ^25Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and
   to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou
   doest.

   ^26And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after
   Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew
   it not.

   ^27And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the
   gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth
   rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.

   ^28And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are
   guiltless before the Lord for ever from the blood of Abner the son of
   Ner:

   ^29Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father's house; and
   let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or
   that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the
   sword, or that lacketh bread.

   ^30So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain
   their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.

   ^31And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him,
   Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner.
   And king David himself followed the bier.

   ^32And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice,
   and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.

   ^33And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool
   dieth?

   ^34Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man
   falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept
   again over him.

   ^35And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was
   yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I
   taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.

   ^36And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as
   whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.

   ^37For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was
   not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.

   ^38And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a
   prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

   ^39And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons
   of Zeruiah be too hard for me: the Lord shall reward the doer of evil
   according to his wickedness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 4

   And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were
   feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.

   ^2And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of
   the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of
   Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was
   reckoned to Benjamin:

   ^3And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until
   this day.)

   ^4And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was
   five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of
   Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as
   she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was
   Mephibosheth.

   ^5And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and
   came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay on a
   bed at noon.

   ^6And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they
   would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and
   Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

   ^7For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his
   bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and
   took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.

   ^8And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and
   said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine
   enemy, which sought thy life; and the Lord hath avenged my lord the
   king this day of Saul, and of his seed.

   ^9And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon
   the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the Lord liveth, who hath
   redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

   ^10When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have
   brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who
   thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:

   ^11How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his
   own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of
   your hand, and take you away from the earth?

   ^12And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off
   their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron.
   But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of
   Abner in Hebron.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 5

   Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake,
   saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

   ^2Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that
   leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou
   shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.

   ^3So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king
   David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they
   anointed David king over Israel.

   ^4David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
   forty years.

   ^5In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in
   Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.

   ^6And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the
   inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou
   take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither:
   thinking, David cannot come in hither.

   ^7Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city
   of David.

   ^8And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and
   smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, that are hated of
   David's soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The
   blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

   ^9So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And
   David built round about from Millo and inward.

   ^10And David went on, and grew great, and the Lord God of hosts was
   with him.

   ^11And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees,
   and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.

   ^12And David perceived that the Lord had established him king over
   Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's
   sake.

   ^13And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after
   he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to
   David.

   ^14And these be the names of those that were born unto him in
   Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,

   ^15Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

   ^16And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.

   ^17But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king
   over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard
   of it, and went down to the hold.

   ^18The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
   Rephaim.

   ^19And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up to the
   Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the Lord said
   unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into
   thine hand.

   ^20And David came to Baalperazim, and David smote them there, and said,
   The Lord hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach
   of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baalperazim.

   ^21And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.

   ^22And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the
   valley of Rephaim.

   ^23And when David enquired of the Lord, he said, Thou shalt not go up;
   but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the
   mulberry trees.

   ^24And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of
   the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall
   the Lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.

   ^25And David did so, as the Lord had commanded him; and smote the
   Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 6

   Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty
   thousand.

   ^2And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from
   Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is
   called by the name of the Lord of hosts that dwelleth between the
   cherubims.

   ^3And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of
   the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons
   of Abinadab, drave the new cart.

   ^4And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah,
   accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.

   ^5And David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all
   manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on
   psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.

   ^6And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his
   hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.

   ^7And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote
   him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.

   ^8And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon
   Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah to this day.

   ^9And David was afraid of the Lord that day, and said, How shall the
   ark of the Lord come to me?

   ^10So David would not remove the ark of the Lord unto him into the city
   of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obededom the
   Gittite.

   ^11And the ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obededom the
   Gittite three months: and the Lord blessed Obededom, and all his
   household.

   ^12And it was told king David, saying, The Lord hath blessed the house
   of Obed- edom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of
   God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of
   Obededom into the city of David with gladness.

   ^13And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the Lord had gone
   six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

   ^14And David danced before the Lord with all his might; and David was
   girded with a linen ephod.

   ^15So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord
   with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.

   ^16And as the ark of the Lord came into the city of David, Michal
   Saul's daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and
   dancing before the Lord; and she despised him in her heart.

   ^17And they brought in the ark of the Lord, and set it in his place, in
   the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David
   offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord.

   ^18And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and
   peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of
   hosts.

   ^19And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of
   Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and
   a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people departed
   every one to his house.

   ^20Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter
   of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of
   Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the
   handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly
   uncovereth himself!

   ^21And David said unto Michal, It was before the Lord, which chose me
   before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over
   the people of the Lord, over Israel: therefore will I play before the
   Lord.

   ^22And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own
   sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall
   I be had in honour.

   ^23Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of
   her death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 7

   And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the Lord had
   given him rest round about from all his enemies;

   ^2That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an
   house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.

   ^3And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart; for
   the Lord is with thee.

   ^4And it came to pass that night, that the word of the Lord came unto
   Nathan, saying,

   ^5Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the Lord, Shalt thou build
   me an house for me to dwell in?

   ^6Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought
   up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have
   walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.

   ^7In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of
   Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I
   commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an
   house of cedar?

   ^8Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the
   Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the
   sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:

   ^9And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all
   thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like
   unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.

   ^10Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant
   them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more;
   neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as
   beforetime,

   ^11And as since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people
   Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. Also the
   Lord telleth thee that he will make thee an house.

   ^12And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy
   fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of
   thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

   ^13He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne
   of his kingdom for ever.

   ^14I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity,
   I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the
   children of men:

   ^15But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul,
   whom I put away before thee.

   ^16And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before
   thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

   ^17According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so
   did Nathan speak unto David.

   ^18Then went king David in, and sat before the Lord, and he said, Who
   am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
   hitherto?

   ^19And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord GOD; but thou
   hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come. And
   is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?

   ^20And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest
   thy servant.

   ^21For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou
   done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.

   ^22Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none like thee,
   neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have
   heard with our ears.

   ^23And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like
   Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make
   him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land,
   before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the
   nations and their gods?

   ^24For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people
   unto thee for ever: and thou, Lord, art become their God.

   ^25And now, O Lord God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy
   servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as
   thou hast said.

   ^26And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The Lord of hosts is
   the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be
   established before thee.

   ^27For thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy
   servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant
   found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

   ^28And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and
   thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:

   ^29Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant,
   that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast
   spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be
   blessed for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 8

   And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and
   subdued them: and David took Methegammah out of the hand of the
   Philistines.

   ^2And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down
   to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and
   with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became David's
   servants, and brought gifts.

   ^3David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he
   went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.

   ^4And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred
   horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the
   chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.

   ^5And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of
   Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

   ^6Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became
   servants to David, and brought gifts. And the Lord preserved David
   whithersoever he went.

   ^7And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
   Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

   ^8And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David
   took exceeding much brass.

   ^9When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of
   Hadadezer,

   ^10Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to
   bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him:
   for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of
   silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:

   ^11Which also king David did dedicate unto the Lord, with the silver
   and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued;

   ^12Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the
   Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of
   Rehob, king of Zobah.

   ^13And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the
   Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.

   ^14And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons,
   and all they of Edom became David's servants. And the Lord preserved
   David whithersoever he went.

   ^15And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and
   justice unto all his people.

   ^16And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the
   son of Ahilud was recorder;

   ^17And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were
   the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;

   ^18And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and
   the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 9

   And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul,
   that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan's sake?

   ^2And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And
   when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou
   Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.

   ^3And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I
   may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king,
   Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.

   ^4And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king,
   Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lodebar.

   ^5Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the
   son of Ammiel, from Lodebar.

   ^6Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come
   unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said,
   Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!

   ^7And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee
   kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee all the
   land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table
   continually.

   ^8And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou
   shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?

   ^9Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I
   have given unto thy master's son all that pertained to Saul and to all
   his house.

   ^10Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land
   for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may
   have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall eat bread
   alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.

   ^11Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king
   hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for
   Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the
   king's sons.

   ^12And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all that
   dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.

   ^13So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at
   the king's table; and was lame on both his feet.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 10

   And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon
   died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.

   ^2Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash,
   as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to comfort him by
   the hand of his servants for his father. And David's servants came into
   the land of the children of Ammon.

   ^3And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord,
   Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent
   comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants unto
   thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?

   ^4Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of
   their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their
   buttocks, and sent them away.

   ^5When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the men
   were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your
   beards be grown, and then return.

   ^6And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the
   children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob, and the
   Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand
   men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men.

   ^7And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
   mighty men.

   ^8And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at
   the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and
   Ishtob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

   ^9When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and
   behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array
   against the Syrians:

   ^10And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his
   brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon.

   ^11And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt
   help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I
   will come and help thee.

   ^12Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for
   the cities of our God: and the Lord do that which seemeth him good.

   ^13And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the
   battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.

   ^14And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, then
   fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab
   returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.

   ^15And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they
   gathered themselves together.

   ^16And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the
   river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of
   Hadarezer went before them.

   ^17And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and
   passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves
   in array against David, and fought with him.

   ^18And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven
   hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote
   Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.

   ^19And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that they
   were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served
   them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any more.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 11

   And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings
   go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him,
   and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged
   Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.

   ^2And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his
   bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house: and from the roof he
   saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look
   upon.

   ^3And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not
   this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?

   ^4And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him,
   and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she
   returned unto her house.

   ^5And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with
   child.

   ^6And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab
   sent Uriah to David.

   ^7And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did,
   and how the people did, and how the war prospered.

   ^8And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And
   Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there followed him a mess
   of meat from the king.

   ^9But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants
   of his lord, and went not down to his house.

   ^10And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his
   house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why
   then didst thou not go down unto thine house?

   ^11And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in
   tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in
   the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink,
   and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will
   not do this thing.

   ^12And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I
   will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the
   morrow.

   ^13And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and
   he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the
   servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.

   ^14And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to
   Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

   ^15And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of
   the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and
   die.

   ^16And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned
   Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.

   ^17And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there
   fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite
   died also.

   ^18Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;

   ^19And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of
   telling the matters of the war unto the king,

   ^20And if so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thee,
   Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew
   ye not that they would shoot from the wall?

   ^21Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a
   piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez?
   why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite
   is dead also.

   ^22So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had
   sent him for.

   ^23And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against
   us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even
   unto the entering of the gate.

   ^24And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some
   of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is
   dead also.

   ^25Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab,
   Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well
   as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow
   it: and encourage thou him.

   ^26And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead,
   she mourned for her husband.

   ^27And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his
   house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that
   David had done displeased the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 12

   And the Lord sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said
   unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other
   poor.

   ^2The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:

   ^3But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had
   bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his
   children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay
   in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.

   ^4And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take
   of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man
   that was come unto him; but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it
   for the man that was come to him.

   ^5And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to
   Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall
   surely die:

   ^6And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing,
   and because he had no pity.

   ^7And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the Lord God
   of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out
   of the hand of Saul;

   ^8And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy
   bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had
   been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such
   things.

   ^9Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil
   in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and
   hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword
   of the children of Ammon.

   ^10Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because
   thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to
   be thy wife.

   ^11Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out
   of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and
   give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the
   sight of this sun.

   ^12For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all
   Israel, and before the sun.

   ^13And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And
   Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt
   not die.

   ^14Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the
   enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee
   shall surely die.

   ^15And Nathan departed unto his house. And the Lord struck the child
   that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.

   ^16David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and
   went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

   ^17And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up
   from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.

   ^18And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the
   servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they
   said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he
   would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we
   tell him that the child is dead?

   ^19But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that
   the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the
   child dead? And they said, He is dead.

   ^20Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself,
   and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and
   worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they
   set bread before him, and he did eat.

   ^21Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast
   done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but
   when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

   ^22And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I
   said, Who can tell whether GOD will be gracious to me, that the child
   may live?

   ^23But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back
   again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

   ^24And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her, and
   lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and
   the Lord loved him.

   ^25And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his
   name Jedidiah, because of the Lord.

   ^26And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took
   the royal city.

   ^27And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against
   Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

   ^28Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp
   against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called
   after my name.

   ^29And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and
   fought against it, and took it.

   ^30And he took their king's crown from off his head, the weight whereof
   was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on
   David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great
   abundance.

   ^31And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them
   under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made
   them pass through the brickkiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of
   the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto
   Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 13

   And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a
   fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved
   her.

   ^2And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for
   she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any thing to
   her.

   ^3But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah
   David's brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.

   ^4And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king's son, lean from
   day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love
   Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

   ^5And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself
   sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray
   thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in
   my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

   ^6So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come
   to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister
   come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her
   hand.

   ^7Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's
   house, and dress him meat.

   ^8So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down. And
   she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did
   bake the cakes.

   ^9And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to
   eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every
   man from him.

   ^10And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I
   may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and
   brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.

   ^11And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her,
   and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.

   ^12And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such
   thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.

   ^13And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou
   shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee,
   speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.

   ^14Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger
   than she, forced her, and lay with her.

   ^15Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he
   hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And
   Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.

   ^16And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me
   away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would
   not hearken unto her.

   ^17Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put
   now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.

   ^18And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such
   robes were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his
   servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.

   ^19And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers
   colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on
   crying.

   ^20And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been
   with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard
   not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's
   house.

   ^21But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.

   ^22And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for
   Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.

   ^23And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had
   sheepshearers in Baalhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom
   invited all the king's sons.

   ^24And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath
   sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with
   thy servant.

   ^25And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go,
   lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he would
   not go, but blessed him.

   ^26Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with
   us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?

   ^27But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king's sons
   go with him.

   ^28Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when
   Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon;
   then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and
   be valiant.

   ^29And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded.
   Then all the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule,
   and fled.

   ^30And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came
   to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king's sons, and there is
   not one of them left.

   ^31Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth;
   and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.

   ^32And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and said,
   Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the
   king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom
   this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.

   ^33Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart,
   to think that all the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead.

   ^34But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up
   his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of
   the hill side behind him.

   ^35And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king's sons come: as thy
   servant said, so it is.

   ^36And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking,
   that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept:
   and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.

   ^37But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king of
   Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.

   ^38So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.

   ^39And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he
   was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 14

   Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward
   Absalom.

   ^2And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said
   unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now
   mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman
   that had a long time mourned for the dead:

   ^3And come to the king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put
   the words in her mouth.

   ^4And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her face
   to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.

   ^5And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I am
   indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.

   ^6And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the
   field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other,
   and slew him.

   ^7And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and
   they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him,
   for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the heir
   also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall not
   leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.

   ^8And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will give
   charge concerning thee.

   ^9And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the
   iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his
   throne be guiltless.

   ^10And the king said, Whosoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to me,
   and he shall not touch thee any more.

   ^11Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the Lord thy God,
   that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any
   more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the Lord liveth, there
   shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.

   ^12Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word
   unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.

   ^13And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing
   against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one
   which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his
   banished.

   ^14For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which
   cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet
   doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.

   ^15Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the
   king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid
   said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will
   perform the request of his handmaid.

   ^16For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of
   the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the
   inheritance of God.

   ^17Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now be
   comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern
   good and bad: therefore the Lord thy God will be with thee.

   ^18Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I
   pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my
   lord the king now speak.

   ^19And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?
   And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord the king,
   none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord
   the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all
   these words in the mouth of thine handmaid:

   ^20To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this
   thing: and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God,
   to know all things that are in the earth.

   ^21And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go
   therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.

   ^22And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and
   thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have
   found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath
   fulfilled the request of his servant.

   ^23So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.

   ^24And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not
   see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the
   king's face.

   ^25But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom
   for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head
   there was no blemish in him.

   ^26And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year's end that he
   polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:)
   he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king's
   weight.

   ^27And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose
   name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.

   ^28So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's
   face.

   ^29Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but
   he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he
   would not come.

   ^30Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine,
   and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants
   set the field on fire.

   ^31Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto
   him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?

   ^32And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come
   hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come
   from Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now
   therefore let me see the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in
   me, let him kill me.

   ^33So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called for
   Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the
   ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 15

   And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and
   horses, and fifty men to run before him.

   ^2And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and
   it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king
   for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what city art
   thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.

   ^3And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right; but
   there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.

   ^4Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that
   every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would
   do him justice!

   ^5And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him to do him
   obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him.

   ^6And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king
   for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.

   ^7And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the
   king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto
   the Lord, in Hebron.

   ^8For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying,
   If the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve
   the Lord.

   ^9And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to
   Hebron.

   ^10But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying,
   As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom
   reigneth in Hebron.

   ^11And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were
   called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.

   ^12And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counsellor,
   from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the
   conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with
   Absalom.

   ^13And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men
   of Israel are after Absalom.

   ^14And David said unto all his servants that were with him at
   Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from
   Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring
   evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.

   ^15And the king's servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are
   ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.

   ^16And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the
   king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.

   ^17And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried
   in a place that was far off.

   ^18And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites,
   and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men which
   came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.

   ^19Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also
   with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou art a
   stranger, and also an exile.

   ^20Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up
   and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back
   thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.

   ^21And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the Lord liveth, and as my
   lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be,
   whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be.

   ^22And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite
   passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with
   him.

   ^23And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people
   passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and
   all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.

   ^24And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing the
   ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and
   Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the
   city.

   ^25And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the
   city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
   again, and shew me both it, and his habitation:

   ^26But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I,
   let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.

   ^27The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer?
   return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy
   son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

   ^28See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there come
   word from you to certify me.

   ^29Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to
   Jerusalem: and they tarried there.

   ^30And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went
   up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people
   that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping
   as they went up.

   ^31And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators
   with Absalom. And David said, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of
   Ahithophel into foolishness.

   ^32And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the
   mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet
   him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head:

   ^33Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be
   a burden unto me:

   ^34But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy
   servant, O king; as I have been thy father's servant hitherto, so will
   I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel
   of Ahithophel.

   ^35And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests?
   therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of
   the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.

   ^36Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's
   son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shall send unto me
   every thing that ye can hear.

   ^37So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came into
   Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 16

   And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold, Ziba the
   servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and
   upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of
   raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.

   ^2And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba
   said, The asses be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread
   and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as
   be faint in the wilderness may drink.

   ^3And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said unto
   the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shall
   the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.

   ^4Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained unto
   Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find
   grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.

   ^5And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of
   the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of
   Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.

   ^6And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David:
   and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on
   his left.

   ^7And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody
   man, and thou man of Belial:

   ^8The Lord hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul,
   in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the Lord hath delivered the
   kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken
   in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

   ^9Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this
   dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take
   off his head.

   ^10And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah?
   so let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David. Who
   shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?

   ^11And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son,
   which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may
   this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord
   hath bidden him.

   ^12It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the
   Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.

   ^13And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the
   hill's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones
   at him, and cast dust.

   ^14And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary, and
   refreshed themselves there.

   ^15And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to
   Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

   ^16And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was
   come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king,
   God save the king.

   ^17And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why
   wentest thou not with thy friend?

   ^18And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the Lord, and this
   people, and all the men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him
   will I abide.

   ^19And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence
   of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so will I be in
   thy presence.

   ^20Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we
   shall do.

   ^21And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father's
   concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall
   hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all
   that are with thee be strong.

   ^22So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom
   went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.

   ^23And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days,
   was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all the
   counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 17

   Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve
   thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night:

   ^2And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will
   make him afraid: and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I
   will smite the king only:

   ^3And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the man whom thou
   seekest is as if all returned: so all the people shall be in peace.

   ^4And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.

   ^5Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear
   likewise what he saith.

   ^6And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying,
   Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after his saying?
   if not; speak thou.

   ^7And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given
   is not good at this time.

   ^8For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be
   mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her
   whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge
   with the people.

   ^9Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it
   will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that
   whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people
   that follow Absalom.

   ^10And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion,
   shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty
   man, and they which be with him are valiant men.

   ^11Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee,
   from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for
   multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.

   ^12So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and
   we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of him and
   of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so much as
   one.

   ^13Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring
   ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until there be
   not one small stone found there.

   ^14And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai
   the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the Lord had
   appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that
   the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.

   ^15Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and
   thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus
   and thus have I counselled.

   ^16Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not this
   night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over; lest the
   king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.

   ^17Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not be
   seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they
   went and told king David.

   ^18Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of
   them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which had a
   well in his court; whither they went down.

   ^19And the woman took and spread a covering over the well's mouth, and
   spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.

   ^20And when Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they
   said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They
   be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not
   find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

   ^21And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out
   of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise,
   and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counselled
   against you.

   ^22Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they
   passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them
   that was not gone over Jordan.

   ^23And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he
   saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city,
   and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was
   buried in the sepulchre of his father.

   ^24Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and
   all the men of Israel with him.

   ^25And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which
   Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in
   to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother.

   ^26So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.

   ^27And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the
   son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of
   Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,

   ^28Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and
   barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and
   parched pulse,

   ^29And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and
   for the people that were with him, to eat: for they said, The people is
   hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 18

   And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of
   thousands and captains of hundreds over them.

   ^2And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of
   Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah,
   Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite.
   And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you
   myself also.

   ^3But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee
   away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they
   care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now
   it is better that thou succour us out of the city.

   ^4And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And the
   king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds
   and by thousands.

   ^5And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal
   gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the
   people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning
   Absalom.

   ^6So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the battle
   was in the wood of Ephraim;

   ^7Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David,
   and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.

   ^8For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country:
   and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.

   ^9And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule,
   and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head
   caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the
   earth; and the mule that was under him went away.

   ^10And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw
   Absalom hanged in an oak.

   ^11And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest
   him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would
   have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.

   ^12And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand
   shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand
   against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and
   Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man
   Absalom.

   ^13Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for
   there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have
   set thyself against me.

   ^14Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three
   darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while
   he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

   ^15And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compassed about and smote
   Absalom, and slew him.

   ^16And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing
   after Israel: for Joab held back the people.

   ^17And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood,
   and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled
   every one to his tent.

   ^18Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a
   pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, I have no son to keep
   my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own name:
   and it is called unto this day, Absalom's place.

   ^19Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the
   king tidings, how that the Lord hath avenged him of his enemies.

   ^20And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but
   thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no
   tidings, because the king's son is dead.

   ^21Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And
   Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.

   ^22Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever,
   let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore
   wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?

   ^23But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then
   Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.

   ^24And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the
   roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked,
   and behold a man running alone.

   ^25And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he
   be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew
   near.

   ^26And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called
   unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone. And the
   king said, He also bringeth tidings.

   ^27And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost is
   like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is
   a good man, and cometh with good tidings.

   ^28And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell
   down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be
   the Lord thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their
   hand against my lord the king.

   ^29And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz
   answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw
   a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

   ^30And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he
   turned aside, and stood still.

   ^31And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king:
   for the Lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up
   against thee.

   ^32And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And
   Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
   against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

   ^33And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the
   gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son,
   my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my
   son!
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 19

   And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for
   Absalom.

   ^2And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
   people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for
   his son.

   ^3And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people
   being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

   ^4But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice,
   O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!

   ^5And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed
   this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy
   life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of
   thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;

   ^6In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou
   hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor
   servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all
   we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.

   ^7Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy
   servants: for I swear by the Lord, if thou go not forth, there will not
   tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than
   all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

   ^8Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the
   people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the
   people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent.

   ^9And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of
   Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and
   he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled
   out of the land for Absalom.

   ^10And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now
   therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?

   ^11And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying,
   Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring
   the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to
   the king, even to his house.

   ^12Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are
   ye the last to bring back the king?

   ^13And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God
   do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before
   me continually in the room of Joab.

   ^14And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of
   one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and
   all thy servants.

   ^15So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal,
   to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.

   ^16And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim,
   hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.

   ^17And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the
   servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty
   servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.

   ^18And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's household,
   and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down
   before the king, as he was come over Jordan;

   ^19And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me,
   neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day
   that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take
   it to his heart.

   ^20For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold, I
   am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to
   meet my lord the king.

   ^21But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei
   be put to death for this, because he cursed the Lord'S anointed?

   ^22And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that
   ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put
   to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king
   over Israel?

   ^23Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the
   king sware unto him.

   ^24And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and had
   neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his
   clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in
   peace.

   ^25And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king,
   that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me,
   Mephibosheth?

   ^26And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy
   servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go
   to the king; because thy servant is lame.

   ^27And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord
   the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine
   eyes.

   ^28For all of my father's house were but dead men before my lord the
   king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine
   own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the
   king?

   ^29And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy
   matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.

   ^30And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all,
   forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own
   house.

   ^31And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over
   Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.

   ^32Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and he
   had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he
   was a very great man.

   ^33And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will
   feed thee with me in Jerusalem.

   ^34And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I
   should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?

   ^35I am this day fourscore years old: and can I discern between good
   and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear
   any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then
   should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?

   ^36Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why
   should the king recompense it me with such a reward?

   ^37Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in
   mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my
   mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord
   the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee.

   ^38And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do
   to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shalt
   require of me, that will I do for thee.

   ^39And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come
   over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto
   his own place.

   ^40Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and
   all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of
   Israel.

   ^41And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto
   the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and
   have brought the king, and his household, and all David's men with him,
   over Jordan?

   ^42And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the
   king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter?
   have we eaten at all of the king's cost? or hath he given us any gift?

   ^43And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have
   ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye:
   why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in
   bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer
   than the words of the men of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 20

   And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba,
   the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We
   have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse:
   every man to his tents, O Israel.

   ^2So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba
   the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from
   Jordan even to Jerusalem.

   ^3And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten
   women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them
   in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up
   unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.

   ^4Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within
   three days, and be thou here present.

   ^5So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer
   than the set time which he had appointed him.

   ^6And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us
   more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue
   after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.

   ^7And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites, and the
   Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to
   pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

   ^8When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went
   before them. And Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto him,
   and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath
   thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.

   ^9And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took
   Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.

   ^10But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand: so he
   smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the
   ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his
   brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

   ^11And one of Joab's men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth
   Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.

   ^12And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And when
   the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out of
   the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that
   every one that came by him stood still.

   ^13When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after
   Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

   ^14And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to
   Bethmaachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and
   went also after him.

   ^15And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmaachah, and they cast
   up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the
   people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.

   ^16Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray
   you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.

   ^17And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou Joab?
   And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of
   thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.

   ^18Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying,
   They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the matter.

   ^19I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou
   seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swallow
   up the inheritance of the Lord?

   ^20And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I
   should swallow up or destroy.

   ^21The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of
   Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against
   David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman
   said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.

   ^22Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut
   off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab. And
   he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his
   tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.

   ^23Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of
   Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites:

   ^24And Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud
   was recorder:

   ^25And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:

   ^26And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 21

   Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after
   year; and David enquired of the Lord. And the Lord answered, It is for
   Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.

   ^2And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the
   Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of
   the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul
   sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)

   ^3Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you?
   and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the
   inheritance of the Lord?

   ^4And the Gibeonites said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of
   Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kill any man in
   Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that will I do for you.

   ^5And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that
   devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of
   the coasts of Israel,

   ^6Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them
   up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did choose. And the
   king said, I will give them.

   ^7But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of
   Saul, because of the Lord'S oath that was between them, between David
   and Jonathan the son of Saul.

   ^8But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom
   she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of
   Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of
   Barzillai the Meholathite:

   ^9And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they
   hanged them in the hill before the Lord: and they fell all seven
   together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first
   days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

   ^10And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for
   her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped
   upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air to
   rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.

   ^11And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the
   concubine of Saul, had done.

   ^12And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan
   his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them from the
   street of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the
   Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa:

   ^13And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of
   Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.

   ^14And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the
   country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and
   they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was
   intreated for the land.

   ^15Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David
   went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the
   Philistines: and David waxed faint.

   ^16And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of
   whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being
   girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.

   ^17But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the
   Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him,
   saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench
   not the light of Israel.

   ^18And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with
   the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which
   was of the sons of the giant.

   ^19And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where
   Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of
   Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

   ^20And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great
   stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six
   toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.

   ^21And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea the brother of
   David slew him.

   ^22These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of
   David, and by the hand of his servants.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 22

   And David spake unto the Lord the words of this song in the day that
   the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out
   of the hand of Saul:

   ^2And he said, The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;

   ^3The God of my rock; in him will I trust: he is my shield, and the
   horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou
   savest me from violence.

   ^4I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be
   saved from mine enemies.

   ^5When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men made
   me afraid;

   ^6The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the snares of death prevented
   me;

   ^7In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God: and he
   did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry did enter into his
   ears.

   ^8Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved
   and shook, because he was wroth.

   ^9There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
   devoured: coals were kindled by it.

   ^10He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under his
   feet.

   ^11And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the
   wings of the wind.

   ^12And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and
   thick clouds of the skies.

   ^13Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.

   ^14The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice.

   ^15And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and
   discomfited them.

   ^16And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world
   were discovered, at the rebuking of the Lord, at the blast of the
   breath of his nostrils.

   ^17He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;

   ^18He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me:
   for they were too strong for me.

   ^19They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my
   stay.

   ^20He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me,
   because he delighted in me.

   ^21The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the
   cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

   ^22For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
   from my God.

   ^23For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I did
   not depart from them.

   ^24I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine
   iniquity.

   ^25Therefore the Lord hath recompensed me according to my
   righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.

   ^26With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the
   upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.

   ^27With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou
   wilt shew thyself unsavoury.

   ^28And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon the
   haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.

   ^29For thou art my lamp, O Lord: and the Lord will lighten my darkness.

   ^30For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped over
   a wall.

   ^31As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the Lord is tried: he is
   a buckler to all them that trust in him.

   ^32For who is God, save the Lord? and who is a rock, save our God?

   ^33God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.

   ^34He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and setteth me upon my high
   places.

   ^35He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by
   mine arms.

   ^36Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy
   gentleness hath made me great.

   ^37Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not slip.

   ^38I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not
   again until I had consumed them.

   ^39And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not
   arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.

   ^40For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose up
   against me hast thou subdued under me.

   ^41Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might
   destroy them that hate me.

   ^42They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the Lord, but he
   answered them not.

   ^43Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp
   them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.

   ^44Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou
   hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not shall
   serve me.

   ^45Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear,
   they shall be obedient unto me.

   ^46Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their
   close places.

   ^47The Lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God of
   the rock of my salvation.

   ^48It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under
   me,

   ^49And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted
   me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered
   me from the violent man.

   ^50Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen,
   and I will sing praises unto thy name.

   ^51He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his
   anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 23

   Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and
   the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob,
   and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,

   ^2The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.

   ^3The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that
   ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

   ^4And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth,
   even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the
   earth by clear shining after rain.

   ^5Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an
   everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all
   my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.

   ^6But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away,
   because they cannot be taken with hands:

   ^7But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the
   staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the
   same place.

   ^8These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite
   that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the
   Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one
   time.

   ^9And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the
   three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were
   there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone
   away:

   ^10He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and
   his hand clave unto the sword: and the Lord wrought a great victory
   that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil.

   ^11And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the
   Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of
   ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.

   ^12But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew
   the Philistines: and the Lord wrought a great victory.

   ^13And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the
   harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the Philistines
   pitched in the valley of Rephaim.

   ^14And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistines
   was then in Bethlehem.

   ^15And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the
   water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!

   ^16And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines,
   and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and
   took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink
   thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord.

   ^17And he said, Be it far from me, O Lord, that I should do this: is
   not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
   therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty
   men.

   ^18And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief
   among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and slew
   them, and had the name among three.

   ^19Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their captain:
   howbeit he attained not unto the first three.

   ^20And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of
   Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he
   went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:

   ^21And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear
   in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the
   spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

   ^22These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among
   three mighty men.

   ^23He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the
   first three. And David set him over his guard.

   ^24Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of
   Dodo of Bethlehem,

   ^25Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,

   ^26Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,

   ^27Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,

   ^28Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,

   ^29Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out
   of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,

   ^30Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,

   ^31Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,

   ^32Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,

   ^33Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite,

   ^34Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the
   son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,

   ^35Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,

   ^36Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,

   ^37Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the
   son of Zeruiah,

   ^38Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite,

   ^39Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Samuel 24

   And again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
   moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.

   ^2For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with
   him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to
   Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the
   people.

   ^3And Joab said unto the king, Now the Lord thy God add unto the
   people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of
   my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in
   this thing?

   ^4Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against
   the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went
   out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.

   ^5And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side
   of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward
   Jazer:

   ^6Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they
   came to Danjaan, and about to Zidon,

   ^7And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the
   Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of
   Judah, even to Beersheba.

   ^8So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at
   the end of nine months and twenty days.

   ^9And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king:
   and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew
   the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.

   ^10And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people.
   And David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have
   done: and now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy
   servant; for I have done very foolishly.

   ^11For when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord came unto
   the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,

   ^12Go and say unto David, Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three
   things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

   ^13So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall seven
   years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three
   months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be
   three days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what answer I
   shall return to him that sent me.

   ^14And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now
   into the hand of the Lord; for his mercies are great: and let me not
   fall into the hand of man.

   ^15So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to
   the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to
   Beersheba seventy thousand men.

   ^16And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy
   it, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that
   destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel
   of the Lord was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.

   ^17And David spake unto the Lord when he saw the angel that smote the
   people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
   these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be
   against me, and against my father's house.

   ^18And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an
   altar unto the Lord in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.

   ^19And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the Lord
   commanded.

   ^20And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on
   toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on
   his face upon the ground.

   ^21And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant?
   And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build an altar
   unto the Lord, that the plague may be stayed from the people.

   ^22And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer up
   what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice,
   and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen for wood.

   ^23All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And
   Araunah said unto the king, The Lord thy God accept thee.

   ^24And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of
   thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my
   God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the
   threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

   ^25And David built there an altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt
   offerings and peace offerings. So the Lord was intreated for the land,
   and the plague was stayed from Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The First Book of the

Kings

  Commonly Called the Third Book of the Kings
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 1

   Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered him with
   clothes, but he gat no heat.

   ^2Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord
   the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her
   cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may
   get heat.

   ^3So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of Israel,
   and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.

   ^4And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered
   to him: but the king knew her not.

   ^5Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be
   king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run
   before him.

   ^6And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why hast
   thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother bare
   him after Absalom.

   ^7And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the
   priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.

   ^8But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the
   prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to
   David, were not with Adonijah.

   ^9And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of
   Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, and called all his brethren the king's
   sons, and all the men of Judah the king's servants:

   ^10But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon
   his brother, he called not.

   ^11Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying,
   Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth reign, and
   David our lord knoweth it not?

   ^12Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that
   thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.

   ^13Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not
   thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly
   Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
   why then doth Adonijah reign?

   ^14Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also will come
   in after thee, and confirm thy words.

   ^15And Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the king
   was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the king.

   ^16And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the king
   said, What wouldest thou?

   ^17And she said unto him, My lord, thou swarest by the Lord thy God
   unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign
   after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.

   ^18And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou
   knowest it not:

   ^19And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and
   hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab
   the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.

   ^20And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee,
   that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord
   the king after him.

   ^21Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep
   with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.

   ^22And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also
   came in.

   ^23And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And when
   he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with
   his face to the ground.

   ^24And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall
   reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?

   ^25For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and
   sheep in abundance, and hath called all the king's sons, and the
   captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat
   and drink before him, and say, God save king Adonijah.

   ^26But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the
   son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.

   ^27Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it
   unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king
   after him?

   ^28Then king David answered and said, Call me Bathsheba. And she came
   into the king's presence, and stood before the king.

   ^29And the king sware, and said, As the Lord liveth, that hath redeemed
   my soul out of all distress,

   ^30Even as I sware unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying,
   Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon
   my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.

   ^31Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence
   to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever.

   ^32And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
   prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the
   king.

   ^33The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your
   lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring
   him down to Gihon:

   ^34And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there
   king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save king
   Solomon.

   ^35Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my
   throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to
   be ruler over Israel and over Judah.

   ^36And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen:
   the Lord God of my lord the king say so too.

   ^37As the Lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with
   Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king
   David.

   ^38So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of
   Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and
   caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to
   Gihon.

   ^39And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and
   anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people said,
   God save king Solomon.

   ^40And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with
   pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the
   sound of them.

   ^41And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as they
   had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the
   trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an
   uproar?

   ^42And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the
   priest came: and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for thou art a
   valiant man, and bringest good tidings.

   ^43And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king
   David hath made Solomon king.

   ^44And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
   prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the
   Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule:

   ^45And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king
   in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city
   rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.

   ^46And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.

   ^47And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king David,
   saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his
   throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the
   bed.

   ^48And also thus said the king, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
   which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even
   seeing it.

   ^49And all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up,
   and went every man his way.

   ^50And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and
   caught hold on the horns of the altar.

   ^51And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king
   Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar,
   saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me to day that he will not slay his
   servant with the sword.

   ^52And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall
   not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found
   in him, he shall die.

   ^53So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And
   he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him,
   Go to thine house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 2

   Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged
   Solomon his son, saying,

   ^2I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew
   thyself a man;

   ^3And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep
   his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his
   testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest
   prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself:

   ^4That the Lord may continue his word which he spake concerning me,
   saying, If thy children take heed to their way, to walk before me in
   truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not
   fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel.

   ^5Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me,
   and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner
   the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and
   shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his
   girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his
   feet.

   ^6Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go
   down to the grave in peace.

   ^7But shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let
   them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me when I
   fled because of Absalom thy brother.

   ^8And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite
   of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I
   went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I sware to
   him by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword.

   ^9Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and
   knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou
   down to the grave with blood.

   ^10So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
   David.

   ^11And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven
   years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
   Jerusalem.

   ^12Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his
   kingdom was established greatly.

   ^13And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of
   Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.

   ^14He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said,
   Say on.

   ^15And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all
   Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom
   is turned about, and is become my brother's: for it was his from the
   Lord.

   ^16And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said unto
   him, Say on.

   ^17And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he will
   not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.

   ^18And Bathsheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.

   ^19Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for
   Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her,
   and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king's
   mother; and she sat on his right hand.

   ^20Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee, say
   me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I will
   not say thee nay.

   ^21And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy
   brother to wife.

   ^22And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost
   thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom
   also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the
   priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

   ^23Then king Solomon sware by the Lord, saying, God do so to me, and
   more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.

   ^24Now therefore, as the Lord liveth, which hath established me, and
   set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house,
   as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.

   ^25And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada;
   and he fell upon him that he died.

   ^26And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth,
   unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at
   this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the Lord
   GOD before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in all
   wherein my father was afflicted.

   ^27So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord; that
   he might fulfil the word of the Lord, which he spake concerning the
   house of Eli in Shiloh.

   ^28Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah,
   though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle
   of the Lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

   ^29And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the tabernacle
   of the Lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah
   the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.

   ^30And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the Lord, and said unto him,
   Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die here.
   And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and
   thus he answered me.

   ^31And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon him,
   and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood, which Joab
   shed, from me, and from the house of my father.

   ^32And the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon
   two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the
   sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of
   Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether,
   captain of the host of Judah.

   ^33Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and upon
   the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed, and
   upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever from
   the Lord.

   ^34So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew
   him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.

   ^35And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the
   host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.

   ^36And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build
   thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence
   any whither.

   ^37For it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over
   the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely
   die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.

   ^38And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good: as my lord the
   king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem
   many days.

   ^39And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
   servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath.
   And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath.

   ^40And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish to
   seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath.

   ^41And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath,
   and was come again.

   ^42And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I
   not make thee to swear by the Lord, and protested unto thee, saying,
   Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any
   whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word
   that I have heard is good.

   ^43Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and the
   commandment that I have charged thee with?

   ^44The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness
   which thine heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father:
   therefore the Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head;

   ^45And king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be
   established before the Lord for ever.

   ^46So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went out,
   and fell upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established in the
   hand of Solomon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 3

   And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took
   Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he
   had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the Lord,
   and the wall of Jerusalem round about.

   ^2Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house
   built unto the name of the Lord, until those days.

   ^3And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his
   father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.

   ^4And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the
   great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon
   that altar.

   ^5In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God
   said, Ask what I shall give thee.

   ^6And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father
   great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in
   righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast
   kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit
   on his throne, as it is this day.

   ^7And now, O Lord my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of
   David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out
   or come in.

   ^8And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen,
   a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.

   ^9Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
   people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to
   judge this thy so great a people?

   ^10And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.

   ^11And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast
   not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself,
   nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself
   understanding to discern judgment;

   ^12Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a
   wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee
   before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

   ^13And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
   riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings like
   unto thee all thy days.

   ^14And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my
   commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy
   days.

   ^15And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to
   Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and
   offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a
   feast to all his servants.

   ^16Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and
   stood before him.

   ^17And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one
   house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.

   ^18And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that
   this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no
   stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.

   ^19And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid it.

   ^20And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while
   thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child
   in my bosom.

   ^21And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was
   dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not
   my son, which I did bear.

   ^22And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the
   dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the
   living is my son. Thus they spake before the king.

   ^23Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth, and
   thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the dead,
   and my son is the living.

   ^24And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before
   the king.

   ^25And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to
   the one, and half to the other.

   ^26Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for
   her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the
   living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be
   neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

   ^27Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in
   no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.

   ^28And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and
   they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him,
   to do judgment.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 4

   So king Solomon was king over all Israel.

   ^2And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok the
   priest,

   ^3Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son
   of Ahilud, the recorder.

   ^4And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and
   Abiathar were the priests:

   ^5And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers: and Zabud the
   son of Nathan was principal officer, and the king's friend:

   ^6And Ahishar was over the household: and Adoniram the son of Abda was
   over the tribute.

   ^7And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided
   victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year
   made provision.

   ^8And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim:

   ^9The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and
   Elonbethhanan:

   ^10The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the
   land of Hepher:

   ^11The son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; which had Taphath the
   daughter of Solomon to wife:

   ^12Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo, and
   all Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Bethshean to
   Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:

   ^13The son of Geber, in Ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of
   Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained
   the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with
   walls and brasen bars:

   ^14Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:

   ^15Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of
   Solomon to wife:

   ^16Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth:

   ^17Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar:

   ^18Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin:

   ^19Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead, in the country of
   Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og king of Bashan; and he was the
   only officer which was in the land.

   ^20Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
   multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.

   ^21And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the land
   of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought
   presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.

   ^22And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine
   flour, and threescore measures of meal,

   ^23Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred
   sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.

   ^24For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river, from
   Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river: and
   he had peace on all sides round about him.

   ^25And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and
   under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of
   Solomon.

   ^26And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots,
   and twelve thousand horsemen.

   ^27And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all
   that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in his month: they
   lacked nothing.

   ^28Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they
   unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his
   charge.

   ^29And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and
   largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

   ^30And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the
   east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

   ^31For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman,
   and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all
   nations round about.

   ^32And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand
   and five.

   ^33And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even
   unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of
   beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

   ^34And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all
   kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 5

   And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard
   that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram
   was ever a lover of David.

   ^2And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,

   ^3Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto
   the name of the Lord his God for the wars which were about him on every
   side, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet.

   ^4But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side, so that
   there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.

   ^5And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord my
   God, as the Lord spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I
   will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my
   name.

   ^6Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of
   Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will
   I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt appoint:
   for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew
   timber like unto the Sidonians.

   ^7And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he
   rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath
   given unto David a wise son over this great people.

   ^8And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things which
   thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning timber
   of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

   ^9My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I
   will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt
   appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt
   receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for
   my household.

   ^10So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all his
   desire.

   ^11And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to
   his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to
   Hiram year by year.

   ^12And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was
   peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together.

   ^13And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy was
   thirty thousand men.

   ^14And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a
   month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was
   over the levy.

   ^15And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and
   fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains;

   ^16Beside the chief of Solomon's officers which were over the work,
   three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that
   wrought in the work.

   ^17And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly
   stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.

   ^18And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the
   stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 6

   And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the
   children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth
   year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the
   second month, that he began to build the house of the Lord.

   ^2And the house which king Solomon built for the Lord, the length
   thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits,
   and the height thereof thirty cubits.

   ^3And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the
   length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten cubits
   was the breadth thereof before the house.

   ^4And for the house he made windows of narrow lights.

   ^5And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about,
   against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of
   the oracle: and he made chambers round about:

   ^6The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six
   cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the
   wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams
   should not be fastened in the walls of the house.

   ^7And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready
   before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe
   nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.

   ^8The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the house:
   and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber, and out
   of the middle into the third.

   ^9So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with
   beams and boards of cedar.

   ^10And then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits high:
   and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.

   ^11And the word of the Lord came to Solomon, saying,

   ^12Concerning this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk
   in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments
   to walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake
   unto David thy father:

   ^13And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake
   my people Israel.

   ^14So Solomon built the house, and finished it.

   ^15And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,
   both the floor of the house, and the walls of the cieling: and he
   covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the
   house with planks of fir.

   ^16And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the floor
   and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built them for it within,
   even for the oracle, even for the most holy place.

   ^17And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits long.

   ^18And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open
   flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.

   ^19And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark
   of the covenant of the Lord.

   ^20And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and
   twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and
   he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of
   cedar.

   ^21So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a
   partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it
   with gold.

   ^22And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished all
   the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with
   gold.

   ^23And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each ten
   cubits high.

   ^24And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the
   other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing unto
   the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.

   ^25And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of one
   measure and one size.

   ^26The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the
   other cherub.

   ^27And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and they stretched
   forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched
   the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall;
   and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house.

   ^28And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.

   ^29And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved
   figures of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, within and
   without.

   ^30And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and
   without.

   ^31And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree: the
   lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.

   ^32The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them
   carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid
   them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm
   trees.

   ^33So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a
   fourth part of the wall.

   ^34And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one door
   were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.

   ^35And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and
   covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.

   ^36And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a
   row of cedar beams.

   ^37In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the Lord laid,
   in the month Zif:

   ^38And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth
   month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and
   according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building
   it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 7

   But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished
   all his house.

   ^2He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof
   was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the
   height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with
   cedar beams upon the pillars.

   ^3And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty
   five pillars, fifteen in a row.

   ^4And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light in
   three ranks.

   ^5And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and light
   was against light in three ranks.

   ^6And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty cubits,
   and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was before them:
   and the other pillars and the thick beam were before them.

   ^7Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the
   porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the
   floor to the other.

   ^8And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch,
   which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh's
   daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.

   ^9All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed
   stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation
   unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.

   ^10And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones
   of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

   ^11And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones,
   and cedars.

   ^12And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed stones,
   and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the house of the
   Lord, and for the porch of the house.

   ^13And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.

   ^14He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a
   man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and
   understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to
   king Solomon, and wrought all his work.

   ^15For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece:
   and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.

   ^16And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops of
   the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and the
   height of the other chapiter was five cubits:

   ^17And nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the
   chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one
   chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.

   ^18And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one
   network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with
   pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.

   ^19And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of lily
   work in the porch, four cubits.

   ^20And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also above,
   over against the belly which was by the network: and the pomegranates
   were two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter.

   ^21And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set up
   the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the
   left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.

   ^22And upon the top of the pillars was lily work: so was the work of
   the pillars finished.

   ^23And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other:
   it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a line of
   thirty cubits did compass it round about.

   ^24And under the brim of it round about there were knops compassing it,
   ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops were cast in
   two rows, when it was cast.

   ^25It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three
   looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three
   looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all
   their hinder parts were inward.

   ^26And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought
   like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two
   thousand baths.

   ^27And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one
   base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height
   of it.

   ^28And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders, and
   the borders were between the ledges:

   ^29And on the borders that were between the ledges were lions, oxen,
   and cherubims: and upon the ledges there was a base above: and beneath
   the lions and oxen were certain additions made of thin work.

   ^30And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and the
   four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver were
   undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.

   ^31And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit: but
   the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit and an
   half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their borders,
   foursquare, not round.

   ^32And under the borders were four wheels; and the axletrees of the
   wheels were joined to the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit
   and half a cubit.

   ^33And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel:
   their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes,
   were all molten.

   ^34And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base:
   and the undersetters were of the very base itself.

   ^35And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a cubit
   high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders
   thereof were of the same.

   ^36For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof,
   he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the proportion
   of every one, and additions round about.

   ^37After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one
   casting, one measure, and one size.

   ^38Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths:
   and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten bases
   one laver.

   ^39And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on
   the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the
   house eastward over against the south.

   ^40And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram
   made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for the
   house of the Lord:

   ^41The two pillars, and the two bowls of the chapiters that were on the
   top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of
   the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars;

   ^42And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, even two rows of
   pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters
   that were upon the pillars;

   ^43And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases;

   ^44And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;

   ^45And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these
   vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the Lord,
   were of bright brass.

   ^46In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
   between Succoth and Zarthan.

   ^47And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were
   exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.

   ^48And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of
   the Lord: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the
   shewbread was,

   ^49And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five
   on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and
   the tongs of gold,

   ^50And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and
   the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of
   the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house,
   to wit, of the temple.

   ^51So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of
   the Lord. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had
   dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put
   among the treasures of the house of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 8

   Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the
   tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king
   Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant
   of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion.

   ^2And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at
   the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.

   ^3And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.

   ^4And they brought up the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the
   congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle,
   even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.

   ^5And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were
   assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and
   oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

   ^6And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto
   his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even
   under the wings of the cherubims.

   ^7For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the
   ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.

   ^8And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen
   out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen
   without: and there they are unto this day.

   ^9There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which
   Moses put there at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the
   children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.

   ^10And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
   place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord,

   ^11So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the
   cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord.

   ^12Then spake Solomon, The Lord said that he would dwell in the thick
   darkness.

   ^13I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for
   thee to abide in for ever.

   ^14And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation
   of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)

   ^15And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which spake with his
   mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it,
   saying,

   ^16Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I
   chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, that
   my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my people
   Israel.

   ^17And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the
   name of the Lord God of Israel.

   ^18And the Lord said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine
   heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in
   thine heart.

   ^19Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall
   come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name.

   ^20And the Lord hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen
   up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as
   the Lord promised, and have built an house for the name of the Lord God
   of Israel.

   ^21And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant of
   the Lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of
   the land of Egypt.

   ^22And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of
   all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward
   heaven:

   ^23And he said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in
   heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with
   thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:

   ^24Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst
   him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thine
   hand, as it is this day.

   ^25Therefore now, Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
   father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a
   man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children
   take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked
   before me.

   ^26And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified,
   which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.

   ^27But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and
   heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I
   have builded?

   ^28Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his
   supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer,
   which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:

   ^29That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even
   toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that
   thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make toward
   this place.

   ^30And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy
   people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou in
   heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.

   ^31If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon
   him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this
   house:

   ^32Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning
   the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the
   righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.

   ^33When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because
   they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and
   confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this
   house:

   ^34Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel,
   and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest unto their
   fathers.

   ^35When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have
   sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy
   name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:

   ^36Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and
   of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they
   should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy
   people for an inheritance.

   ^37If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting,
   mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege them
   in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness
   there be;

   ^38What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all
   thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own
   heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:

   ^39Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do,
   and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest;
   (for thou, even thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of
   men;)

   ^40That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land
   which thou gavest unto our fathers.

   ^41Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel,
   but cometh out of a far country for thy name's sake;

   ^42(For they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and
   of thy stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this
   house;

   ^43Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that
   the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth may know
   thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that they may know
   that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.

   ^44If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever
   thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the Lord toward the city
   which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy
   name:

   ^45Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and
   maintain their cause.

   ^46If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,)
   and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that
   they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;

   ^47Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they were
   carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the
   land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and
   have done perversely, we have committed wickedness;

   ^48And so return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their
   soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and
   pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers,
   the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for
   thy name:

   ^49Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy
   dwelling place, and maintain their cause,

   ^50And forgive thy people that have sinned against thee, and all their
   transgressions wherein they have transgressed against thee, and give
   them compassion before them who carried them captive, that they may
   have compassion on them:

   ^51For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest
   forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:

   ^52That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant,
   and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in
   all that they call for unto thee.

   ^53For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the earth,
   to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy
   servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord GOD.

   ^54And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this
   prayer and supplication unto the Lord, he arose from before the altar
   of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to
   heaven.

   ^55And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud
   voice, saying,

   ^56Blessed be the Lord, that hath given rest unto his people Israel,
   according to all that he promised: there hath not failed one word of
   all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his
   servant.

   ^57The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not
   leave us, nor forsake us:

   ^58That he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways,
   and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments,
   which he commanded our fathers.

   ^59And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before
   the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night, that he maintain
   the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at all
   times, as the matter shall require:

   ^60That all the people of the earth may know that the Lord is God, and
   that there is none else.

   ^61Let your heart therefore be perfect with the Lord our God, to walk
   in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.

   ^62And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the
   Lord.

   ^63And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered
   unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty
   thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated
   the house of the Lord.

   ^64The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was
   before the house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and
   meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brasen
   altar that was before the Lord was too little to receive the burnt
   offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings.

   ^65And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a
   great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of
   Egypt, before the Lord our God, seven days and seven days, even
   fourteen days.

   ^66On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the
   king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the
   goodness that the Lord had done for David his servant, and for Israel
   his people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 9

   And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the
   house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all Solomon's desire which
   he was pleased to do,

   ^2That the Lord appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared
   unto him at Gibeon.

   ^3And the Lord said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy
   supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this
   house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine
   eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.

   ^4And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in
   integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I
   have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:

   ^5Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever,
   as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a
   man upon the throne of Israel.

   ^6But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children,
   and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set
   before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:

   ^7Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them;
   and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of
   my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people:

   ^8And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth by it shall
   be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why hath the Lord
   done thus unto this land, and to this house?

   ^9And they shall answer, Because they forsook the Lord their God, who
   brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken
   hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them:
   therefore hath the Lord brought upon them all this evil.

   ^10And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had
   built the two houses, the house of the Lord, and the king's house,

   ^11(Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees
   and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that then
   king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.

   ^12And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had
   given him; and they pleased him not.

   ^13And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my
   brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day.

   ^14And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.

   ^15And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to
   build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall
   of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

   ^16For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it
   with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given
   it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon's wife.

   ^17And Solomon built Gezer, and Bethhoron the nether,

   ^18And Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land,

   ^19And all the cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his
   chariots, and cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired
   to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his
   dominion.

   ^20And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites,
   Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of
   Israel,

   ^21Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the
   children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those
   did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.

   ^22But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but they
   were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains,
   and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.

   ^23These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon's work,
   five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that wrought in
   the work.

   ^24But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David unto her
   house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Millo.

   ^25And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and
   peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the Lord, and he
   burnt incense upon the altar that was before the Lord. So he finished
   the house.

   ^26And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber, which is beside
   Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.

   ^27And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge
   of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

   ^28And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred
   and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 10

   And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the
   name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions.

   ^2And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that
   bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was
   come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.

   ^3And Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing hid
   from the king, which he told her not.

   ^4And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon's wisdom, and the
   house that he had built,

   ^5And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the
   attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and
   his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the Lord; there was no
   more spirit in her.

   ^6And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine
   own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.

   ^7Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had
   seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and
   prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.

   ^8Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand
   continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

   ^9Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on
   the throne of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore
   made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.

   ^10And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of
   spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such
   abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king
   Solomon.

   ^11And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in
   from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious stones.

   ^12And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of the
   Lord, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for singers:
   there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.

   ^13And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire,
   whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal
   bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her
   servants.

   ^14Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
   hundred threescore and six talents of gold,

   ^15Beside that he had of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the
   spice merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors
   of the country.

   ^16And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
   hundred shekels of gold went to one target.

   ^17And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of
   gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the
   forest of Lebanon.

   ^18Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with
   the best gold.

   ^19The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round
   behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat,
   and two lions stood beside the stays.

   ^20And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon
   the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.

   ^21And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the
   vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none
   were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.

   ^22For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram:
   once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and
   silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

   ^23So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and
   for wisdom.

   ^24And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God
   had put in his heart.

   ^25And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
   vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and
   mules, a rate year by year.

   ^26And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had a
   thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom
   he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at Jerusalem.

   ^27And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars
   made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for
   abundance.

   ^28And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
   king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

   ^29And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels
   of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for all the
   kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring them
   out by their means.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 11

   But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter
   of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and
   Hittites;

   ^2Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of
   Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto
   you: for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods:
   Solomon clave unto these in love.

   ^3And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
   concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

   ^4For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away
   his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord
   his God, as was the heart of David his father.

   ^5For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and
   after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.

   ^6And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully
   after the Lord, as did David his father.

   ^7Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of
   Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the
   abomination of the children of Ammon.

   ^8And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense
   and sacrificed unto their gods.

   ^9And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned
   from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice,

   ^10And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go
   after other gods: but he kept not that which the Lord commanded.

   ^11Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of
   thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have
   commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give
   it to thy servant.

   ^12Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father's
   sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.

   ^13Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
   tribe to thy son for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake
   which I have chosen.

   ^14And the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the
   Edomite: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

   ^15For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of
   the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had smitten every male
   in Edom;

   ^16(For six months did Joab remain there with all Israel, until he had
   cut off every male in Edom:)

   ^17That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants
   with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.

   ^18And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took men
   with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of
   Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and gave
   him land.

   ^19And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he
   gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the
   queen.

   ^20And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes
   weaned in Pharaoh's house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh's household
   among the sons of Pharaoh.

   ^21And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and
   that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let
   me depart, that I may go to mine own country.

   ^22Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me, that,
   behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he answered,
   Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.

   ^23And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah,
   which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:

   ^24And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when
   David slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein,
   and reigned in Damascus.

   ^25And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, beside
   the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over
   Syria.

   ^26And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's
   servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted
   up his hand against the king.

   ^27And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king:
   Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his
   father.

   ^28And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing
   the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over all the
   charge of the house of Joseph.

   ^29And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of
   Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way;
   and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
   the field:

   ^30And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it in
   twelve pieces:

   ^31And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the
   Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the
   hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:

   ^32(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for
   Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of
   Israel:)

   ^33Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth
   the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and
   Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my
   ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and to keep my statutes
   and my judgments, as did David his father.

   ^34Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I
   will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant's
   sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:

   ^35But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give it
   unto thee, even ten tribes.

   ^36And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may
   have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen
   me to put my name there.

   ^37And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that thy
   soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.

   ^38And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee,
   and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my
   statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I will be
   with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will
   give Israel unto thee.

   ^39And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.

   ^40Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and
   fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the
   death of Solomon.

   ^41And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his
   wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?

   ^42And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was
   forty years.

   ^43And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
   David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 12

   And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to
   make him king.

   ^2And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in
   Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king Solomon,
   and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;)

   ^3That they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation
   of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying,

   ^4Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the
   grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon
   us, lighter, and we will serve thee.

   ^5And he said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to
   me. And the people departed.

   ^6And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before
   Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that
   I may answer this people?

   ^7And they spake unto him, saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this
   people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good
   words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.

   ^8But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him,
   and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and which
   stood before him:

   ^9And he said unto them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this
   people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father
   did put upon us lighter?

   ^10And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him,
   saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee,
   saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto
   us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker
   than my father's loins.

   ^11And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add
   to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will
   chastise you with scorpions.

   ^12So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as
   the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.

   ^13And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old men's
   counsel that they gave him;

   ^14And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My
   father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: my father
   also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

   ^15Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause was
   from the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which the Lord spake
   by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

   ^16So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the
   people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?
   neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O
   Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto
   their tents.

   ^17But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of
   Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

   ^18Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and all
   Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king Rehoboam
   made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.

   ^19So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

   ^20And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come
   again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made
   him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of
   David, but the tribe of Judah only.

   ^21And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house
   of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand
   chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel,
   to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

   ^22But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,

   ^23Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all
   the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people,
   saying,

   ^24Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your
   brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for
   this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the
   Lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the Lord.

   ^25Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and
   went out from thence, and built Penuel.

   ^26And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the
   house of David:

   ^27If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at
   Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their
   lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go
   again to Rehoboam king of Judah.

   ^28Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, and
   said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold
   thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

   ^29And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan.

   ^30And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship before
   the one, even unto Dan.

   ^31And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest
   of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.

   ^32And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth
   day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and he offered
   upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the calves that
   he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places
   which he had made.

   ^33So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the
   fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had
   devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of
   Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 13

   And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the
   Lord unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.

   ^2And he cried against the altar in the word of the Lord, and said, O
   altar, altar, thus saith the Lord; Behold, a child shall be born unto
   the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the
   priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones
   shall be burnt upon thee.

   ^3And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the
   Lord hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes that
   are upon it shall be poured out.

   ^4And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the man
   of God, which had cried against the altar in Bethel, that he put forth
   his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which
   he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in
   again to him.

   ^5The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar,
   according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the
   Lord.

   ^6And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now the
   face of the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored
   me again. And the man of God besought the Lord, and the king's hand was
   restored him again, and became as it was before.

   ^7And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh
   thyself, and I will give thee a reward.

   ^8And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half
   thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor
   drink water in this place:

   ^9For so was it charged me by the word of the Lord, saying, Eat no
   bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that thou
   camest.

   ^10So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to
   Bethel.

   ^11Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel; and his sons came and told
   him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Bethel: the
   words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told also to their
   father.

   ^12And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons had
   seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.

   ^13And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled him
   the ass: and he rode thereon,

   ^14And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak:
   and he said unto him, Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah?
   And he said, I am.

   ^15Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.

   ^16And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee:
   neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:

   ^17For it was said to me by the word of the Lord, Thou shalt eat no
   bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou
   camest.

   ^18He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel
   spake unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with thee
   into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied
   unto him.

   ^19So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank
   water.

   ^20And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of the
   Lord came unto the prophet that brought him back:

   ^21And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus
   saith the Lord, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the Lord,
   and hast not kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded
   thee,

   ^22But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place,
   of the which the Lord did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no
   water; thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.

   ^23And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
   drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom he
   had brought back.

   ^24And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him: and
   his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion also
   stood by the carcase.

   ^25And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and
   the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the city
   where the old prophet dwelt.

   ^26And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
   thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the
   word of the Lord: therefore the Lord hath delivered him unto the lion,
   which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the Lord,
   which he spake unto him.

   ^27And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they
   saddled him.

   ^28And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and
   the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the carcase,
   nor torn the ass.

   ^29And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it
   upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the
   city, to mourn and to bury him.

   ^30And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over him,
   saying, Alas, my brother!

   ^31And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spake to his
   sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the
   man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones:

   ^32For the saying which he cried by the word of the Lord against the
   altar in Bethel, and against all the houses of the high places which
   are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.

   ^33After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made
   again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever
   would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests of the high
   places.

   ^34And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it
   off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 14

   At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.

   ^2And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise
   thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get
   thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me that
   I should be king over this people.

   ^3And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey,
   and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the child.

   ^4And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came
   to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes were set
   by reason of his age.

   ^5And the Lord said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to
   ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and thus shalt
   thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in, that she shall
   feign herself to be another woman.

   ^6And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came
   in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why
   feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy
   tidings.

   ^7Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Forasmuch as I
   exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my people
   Israel,

   ^8And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee:
   and yet thou hast not been as my servant David, who kept my
   commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only
   which was right in mine eyes;

   ^9But hast done evil above all that were before thee: for thou hast
   gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to provoke me to
   anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:

   ^10Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and
   will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him
   that is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of
   the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone.

   ^11Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him
   that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the Lord
   hath spoken it.

   ^12Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy feet
   enter into the city, the child shall die.

   ^13And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of
   Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some
   good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.

   ^14Moreover the Lord shall raise him up a king over Israel, who shall
   cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.

   ^15For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water,
   and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to
   their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river, because they
   have made their groves, provoking the Lord to anger.

   ^16And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did
   sin, and who made Israel to sin.

   ^17And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and
   when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died;

   ^18And they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to
   the word of the Lord, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah
   the prophet.

   ^19And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he
   reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
   kings of Israel.

   ^20And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years: and
   he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.

   ^21And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty
   and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen
   years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord did choose out of all the
   tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was
   Naamah an Ammonitess.

   ^22And Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord, and they provoked him
   to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all that
   their fathers had done.

   ^23For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on
   every high hill, and under every green tree.

   ^24And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did according to
   all the abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the
   children of Israel.

   ^25And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak
   king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem:

   ^26And he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the
   treasures of the king's house; he even took away all: and he took away
   all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.

   ^27And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and committed
   them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept the door of
   the king's house.

   ^28And it was so, when the king went into the house of the Lord, that
   the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard chamber.

   ^29Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^30And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.

   ^31And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
   in the city of David. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.
   And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 15

   Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned
   Abijam over Judah.

   ^2Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
   Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

   ^3And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before
   him: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the heart
   of David his father.

   ^4Nevertheless for David's sake did the Lord his God give him a lamp in
   Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:

   ^5Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and
   turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of
   his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.

   ^6And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his
   life.

   ^7Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there
   was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

   ^8And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of
   David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.

   ^9And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over
   Judah.

   ^10And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's
   name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.

   ^11And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did
   David his father.

   ^12And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the
   idols that his fathers had made.

   ^13And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being queen,
   because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her idol,
   and burnt it by the brook Kidron.

   ^14But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa's heart was
   perfect with the Lord all his days.

   ^15And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and the
   things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the Lord, silver,
   and gold, and vessels.

   ^16And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their
   days.

   ^17And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah,
   that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

   ^18Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the
   treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's
   house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa
   sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of
   Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,

   ^19There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and thy
   father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold;
   come and break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may
   depart from me.

   ^20So Ben- hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the
   hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and
   Dan, and Abel-Bethmaachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of
   Naphtali.

   ^21And it came to pass, when Baasha heard thereof, that he left off
   building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.

   ^22Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was
   exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber
   thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them
   Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

   ^23The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he
   did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of
   the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time of his
   old age he was diseased in his feet.

   ^24And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
   the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his
   stead.

   ^25And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the
   second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.

   ^26And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of
   his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.

   ^27And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired
   against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the
   Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon.

   ^28Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him, and
   reigned in his stead.

   ^29And it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the house of
   Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had
   destroyed him, according unto the saying of the Lord, which he spake by
   his servant Ahijah the Shilonite:

   ^30Because of the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made
   Israel sin, by his provocation wherewith he provoked the Lord God of
   Israel to anger.

   ^31Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^32And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their
   days.

   ^33In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of
   Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.

   ^34And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of
   Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 16

   Then the word of the Lord came to Jehu the son of Hanani against
   Baasha, saying,

   ^2Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince
   over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and
   hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their
   sins;

   ^3Behold, I will take away the posterity of Baasha, and the posterity
   of his house; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
   son of Nebat.

   ^4Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that
   dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.

   ^5Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his might,
   are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
   Israel?

   ^6So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah: and Elah
   his son reigned in his stead.

   ^7And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the
   word of the Lord against Baasha, and against his house, even for all
   the evil that he did in the sight of the Lord, in provoking him to
   anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam;
   and because he killed him.

   ^8In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son
   of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.

   ^9And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired
   against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house
   of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.

   ^10And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and
   seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.

   ^11And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on
   his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not one
   that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
   friends.

   ^12Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the
   word of the Lord, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet,

   ^13For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by which
   they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking the
   Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities.

   ^14Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^15In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign
   seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against Gibbethon,
   which belonged to the Philistines.

   ^16And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired,
   and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made Omri, the
   captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.

   ^17And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they
   besieged Tirzah.

   ^18And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he
   went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house
   over him with fire, and died,

   ^19For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the Lord,
   in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make
   Israel to sin.

   ^20Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought,
   are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
   Israel?

   ^21Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the
   people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half
   followed Omri.

   ^22But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that
   followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned.

   ^23In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to
   reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.

   ^24And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver,
   and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built,
   after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria.

   ^25But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse than
   all that were before him.

   ^26For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in
   his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of
   Israel to anger with their vanities.

   ^27Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he
   shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
   of Israel?

   ^28So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria: and Ahab
   his son reigned in his stead.

   ^29And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab
   the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri reigned
   over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.

   ^30And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all
   that were before him.

   ^31And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk
   in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel
   the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served
   Baal, and worshipped him.

   ^32And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he
   had built in Samaria.

   ^33And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of
   Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him.

   ^34In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the
   foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
   thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the Lord,
   which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 17

   And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said
   unto Ahab, As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there
   shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.

   ^2And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,

   ^3Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook
   Cherith, that is before Jordan.

   ^4And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have
   commanded the ravens to feed thee there.

   ^5So he went and did according unto the word of the Lord: for he went
   and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.

   ^6And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread
   and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.

   ^7And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up, because
   there had been no rain in the land.

   ^8And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,

   ^9Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell
   there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.

   ^10So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of
   the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he
   called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a
   vessel, that I may drink.

   ^11And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said, Bring
   me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.

   ^12And she said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an
   handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold,
   I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my
   son, that we may eat it, and die.

   ^13And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but
   make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after
   make for thee and for thy son.

   ^14For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not
   waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord
   sendeth rain upon the earth.

   ^15And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and
   he, and her house, did eat many days.

   ^16And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil
   fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah.

   ^17And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman,
   the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore,
   that there was no breath left in him.

   ^18And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of
   God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay
   my son?

   ^19And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her
   bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him
   upon his own bed.

   ^20And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also
   brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?

   ^21And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto
   the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul
   come into him again.

   ^22And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child
   came into him again, and he revived.

   ^23And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber
   into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said,
   See, thy son liveth.

   ^24And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man
   of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 18

   And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the Lord came to
   Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; and I
   will send rain upon the earth.

   ^2And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore
   famine in Samaria.

   ^3And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house. (Now
   Obadiah feared the Lord greatly:

   ^4For it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, that
   Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and
   fed them with bread and water.)

   ^5And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all fountains of
   water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find grass to save the
   horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the beasts.

   ^6So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab
   went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.

   ^7And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew
   him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord Elijah?

   ^8And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.

   ^9And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy
   servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?

   ^10As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither
   my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when they said, He is not
   there; he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thee
   not.

   ^11And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.

   ^12And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the
   Spirit of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know not; and so when I
   come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me: but I
   thy servant fear the Lord from my youth.

   ^13Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of
   the Lord, how I hid an hundred men of the Lord'S prophets by fifty in a
   cave, and fed them with bread and water?

   ^14And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and
   he shall slay me.

   ^15And Elijah said, As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I
   will surely shew myself unto him to day.

   ^16So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to meet
   Elijah.

   ^17And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him,
   Art thou he that troubleth Israel?

   ^18And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy
   father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord,
   and thou hast followed Baalim.

   ^19Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel,
   and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of
   the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table.

   ^20So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the
   prophets together unto mount Carmel.

   ^21And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
   between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then
   follow him. And the people answered him not a word.

   ^22Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet
   of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.

   ^23Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one
   bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
   put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
   wood, and put no fire under:

   ^24And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of
   the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all
   the people answered and said, It is well spoken.

   ^25And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock
   for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the
   name of your gods, but put no fire under.

   ^26And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it,
   and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O
   Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they
   leaped upon the altar which was made.

   ^27And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry
   aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he
   is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.

   ^28And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with
   knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.

   ^29And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until
   the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there was
   neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.

   ^30And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the
   people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that
   was broken down.

   ^31And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes
   of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the Lord came, saying,
   Israel shall be thy name:

   ^32And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the Lord: and
   he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two
   measures of seed.

   ^33And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and
   laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour
   it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.

   ^34And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time.
   And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time.

   ^35And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench
   also with water.

   ^36And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening
   sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, Lord God of
   Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art
   God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all
   these things at thy word.

   ^37Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art
   the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.

   ^38Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice,
   and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water
   that was in the trench.

   ^39And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they
   said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God.

   ^40And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of
   them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the
   brook Kishon, and slew them there.

   ^41And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is
   a sound of abundance of rain.

   ^42So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top
   of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face
   between his knees,

   ^43And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went
   up, and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven
   times.

   ^44And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there
   ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. And he said,
   Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the
   rain stop thee not.

   ^45And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black
   with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and
   went to Jezreel.

   ^46And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins,
   and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 19

   And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had
   slain all the prophets with the sword.

   ^2Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do
   to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them
   by to morrow about this time.

   ^3And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to
   Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.

   ^4But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and
   sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he
   might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for
   I am not better than my fathers.

   ^5And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel
   touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.

   ^6And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and
   a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him
   down again.

   ^7And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched
   him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for
   thee.

   ^8And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that
   meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.

   ^9And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the
   word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou
   here, Elijah?

   ^10And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for
   the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine
   altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am
   left; and they seek my life, to take it away.

   ^11And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord.
   And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
   mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord
   was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was
   not in the earthquake:

   ^12And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire:
   and after the fire a still small voice.

   ^13And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his
   mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And,
   behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here,
   Elijah?

   ^14And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts:
   because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down
   thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I
   only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.

   ^15And the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness
   of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria:

   ^16And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel:
   and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt thou anoint to be
   prophet in thy room.

   ^17And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of
   Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu
   shall Elisha slay.

   ^18Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which
   have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.

   ^19So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was
   plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth:
   and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.

   ^20And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray
   thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee. And he
   said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?

   ^21And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew
   them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave
   unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after
   Elijah, and ministered unto him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 20

   And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together: and
   there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and
   he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.

   ^2And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said
   unto him, Thus saith Benhadad,

   ^3Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children,
   even the goodliest, are mine.

   ^4And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, according
   to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.

   ^5And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Benhadad,
   saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me
   thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;

   ^6Yet I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and
   they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it
   shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it
   in their hand, and take it away.

   ^7Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said,
   Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief: for he sent
   unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for
   my gold; and I denied him not.

   ^8And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not unto
   him, nor consent.

   ^9Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Benhadad, Tell my lord the
   king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will
   do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and
   brought him word again.

   ^10And Benhadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me, and
   more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all
   the people that follow me.

   ^11And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him that
   girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.

   ^12And it came to pass, when Benhadad heard this message, as he was
   drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his
   servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array
   against the city.

   ^13And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, saying,
   Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou seen all this great multitude? behold, I
   will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am
   the Lord.

   ^14And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the Lord, Even by
   the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall
   order the battle? And he answered, Thou.

   ^15Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and
   they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered all
   the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.

   ^16And they went out at noon. But Benhadad was drinking himself drunk
   in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that
   helped him.

   ^17And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first;
   and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come
   out of Samaria.

   ^18And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or
   whether they be come out for war, take them alive.

   ^19So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the
   city, and the army which followed them.

   ^20And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and Israel
   pursued them: and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse with
   the horsemen.

   ^21And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots,
   and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.

   ^22And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him, Go,
   strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the
   return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.

   ^23And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods are
   gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us
   fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than
   they.

   ^24And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his place,
   and put captains in their rooms:

   ^25And number thee an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse
   for horse, and chariot for chariot: and we will fight against them in
   the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened
   unto their voice, and did so.

   ^26And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Benhadad
   numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.

   ^27And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present, and
   went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them like
   two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.

   ^28And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel, and
   said, Thus saith the Lord, Because the Syrians have said, The Lord is
   God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, therefore will I
   deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know
   that I am the Lord.

   ^29And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And so it
   was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the children of
   Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in one day.

   ^30But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and there a wall fell
   upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left. And Benhadad
   fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.

   ^31And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that the
   kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: let us, I pray thee,
   put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the
   king of Israel: peradventure he will save thy life.

   ^32So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their
   heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Benhadad
   saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? he is my
   brother.

   ^33Now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come from
   him, and did hastily catch it: and they said, Thy brother Benhadad.
   Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Benhadad came forth to him; and he
   caused him to come up into the chariot.

   ^34And Benhadad said unto him, The cities, which my father took from
   thy father, I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee in
   Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send
   thee away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent
   him away.

   ^35And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his
   neighbour in the word of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man
   refused to smite him.

   ^36Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of the
   Lord, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay
   thee. And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and
   slew him.

   ^37Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And the
   man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him.

   ^38So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and
   disguised himself with ashes upon his face.

   ^39And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king: and he said, Thy
   servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man
   turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man: if by
   any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else
   thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

   ^40And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the
   king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast
   decided it.

   ^41And he hasted, and took the ashes away from his face; and the king
   of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.

   ^42And he said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast let go
   out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore
   thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people.

   ^43And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased, and
   came to Samaria.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 21

   And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had
   a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of
   Samaria.

   ^2And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may
   have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I
   will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to
   thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.

   ^3And Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give
   the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.

   ^4And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word
   which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I will
   not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon
   his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.

   ^5But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy
   spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?

   ^6And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and
   said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please
   thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will
   not give thee my vineyard.

   ^7And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom
   of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will
   give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.

   ^8So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal,
   and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his
   city, dwelling with Naboth.

   ^9And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth
   on high among the people:

   ^10And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against
   him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him
   out, and stone him, that he may die.

   ^11And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were the
   inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as it
   was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.

   ^12They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.

   ^13And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him:
   and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in
   the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the
   king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with
   stones, that he died.

   ^14Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead.

   ^15And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and
   was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the
   vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for
   money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

   ^16And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab
   rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take
   possession of it.

   ^17And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

   ^18Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria:
   behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to
   possess it.

   ^19And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast
   thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him,
   saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood
   of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

   ^20And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he
   answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work
   evil in the sight of the Lord.

   ^21Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
   posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the
   wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel,

   ^22And will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of
   Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the
   provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel
   to sin.

   ^23And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, The dogs shall eat
   Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.

   ^24Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that
   dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.

   ^25But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work
   wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.

   ^26And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all
   things as did the Amorites, whom the Lord cast out before the children
   of Israel.

   ^27And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his
   clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
   sackcloth, and went softly.

   ^28And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

   ^29Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth
   himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his
   son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 22

   And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.

   ^2And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of
   Judah came down to the king of Israel.

   ^3And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in
   Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the
   king of Syria?

   ^4And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go with me to battle to
   Ramoth- gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as
   thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.

   ^5And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee,
   at the word of the Lord to day.

   ^6Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four
   hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramothgilead to
   battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord shall
   deliver it into the hand of the king.

   ^7And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord
   besides, that we might enquire of him?

   ^8And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man,
   Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I
   hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And
   Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

   ^9Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Hasten hither
   Micaiah the son of Imlah.

   ^10And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on
   his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the entrance
   of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.

   ^11And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he
   said, Thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou push the Syrians,
   until thou have consumed them.

   ^12And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead,
   and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the king's hand.

   ^13And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him,
   saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the
   king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one
   of them, and speak that which is good.

   ^14And Micaiah said, As the Lord liveth, what the Lord saith unto me,
   that will I speak.

   ^15So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall
   we go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he
   answered him, Go, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the
   hand of the king.

   ^16And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee that
   thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the Lord?

   ^17And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, as sheep
   that have not a shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master: let
   them return every man to his house in peace.

   ^18And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee
   that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?

   ^19And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the Lord: I saw the
   Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him
   on his right hand and on his left.

   ^20And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and
   fall at Ramothgilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on
   that manner.

   ^21And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said,
   I will persuade him.

   ^22And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth,
   and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he
   said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so.

   ^23Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth
   of all these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning
   thee.

   ^24But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah on
   the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to
   speak unto thee?

   ^25And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in that day, when thou
   shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

   ^26And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto
   Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;

   ^27And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and
   feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I
   come in peace.

   ^28And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath not
   spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you.

   ^29So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to
   Ramothgilead.

   ^30And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
   myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the
   king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.

   ^31But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had
   rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great,
   save only with the king of Israel.

   ^32And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
   Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they
   turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.

   ^33And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived
   that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing
   him.

   ^34And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
   Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the
   driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host;
   for I am wounded.

   ^35And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his
   chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran out of
   the wound into the midst of the chariot.

   ^36And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the going
   down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his
   own country.

   ^37So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the
   king in Samaria.

   ^38And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs
   licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the
   word of the Lord which he spake.

   ^39Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory
   house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^40So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his
   stead.

   ^41And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the
   fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

   ^42Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign;
   and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's
   name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

   ^43And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside
   from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord:
   nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people
   offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.

   ^44And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

   ^45Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he
   shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the
   chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^46And the remnant of the sodomites, which remained in the days of his
   father Asa, he took out of the land.

   ^47There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.

   ^48Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but
   they went not; for the ships were broken at Eziongeber.

   ^49Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my servants
   go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.

   ^50And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his
   fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned in
   his stead.

   ^51Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
   seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years
   over Israel.

   ^52And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of
   his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam
   the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin:

   ^53For he served Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the
   Lord God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Second Book of the

Kings

  Commonly Called the Fourth Book of the Kings
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 1

   Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.

   ^2And Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that was
   in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto them,
   Go, enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of
   this disease.

   ^3But the angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up
   to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it
   not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of
   Baalzebub the god of Ekron?

   ^4Now therefore thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not come down from that
   bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die. And Elijah
   departed.

   ^5And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them, Why
   are ye now turned back?

   ^6And they said unto him, There came a man up to meet us, and said unto
   us, Go, turn again unto the king that sent you, and say unto him, Thus
   saith the Lord, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that
   thou sendest to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou
   shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt
   surely die.

   ^7And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to
   meet you, and told you these words?

   ^8And they answered him, He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of
   leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

   ^9Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he
   went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he spake
   unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down.

   ^10And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man
   of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy
   fifty. And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his
   fifty.

   ^11Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty.
   And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king
   said, Come down quickly.

   ^12And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let
   fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the
   fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

   ^13And he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty. And
   the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees
   before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I
   pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be
   precious in thy sight.

   ^14Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two
   captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my
   life now be precious in thy sight.

   ^15And the angel of the Lord said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be not
   afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.

   ^16And he said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Forasmuch as thou hast
   sent messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron, is it not
   because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word? therefore
   thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but
   shalt surely die.

   ^17So he died according to the word of the Lord which Elijah had
   spoken. And Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of Jehoram
   the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son.

   ^18Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 2

   And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by
   a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.

   ^2And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord
   hath sent me to Bethel. And Elisha said unto him, As the Lord liveth,
   and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went down to
   Bethel.

   ^3And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel came forth to
   Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away
   thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye
   your peace.

   ^4And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the
   Lord hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as
   thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.

   ^5And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha, and
   said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master
   from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye your
   peace.

   ^6And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the Lord hath
   sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul
   liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on.

   ^7And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view
   afar off: and they two stood by Jordan.

   ^8And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the
   waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went
   over on dry ground.

   ^9And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto
   Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee.
   And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be
   upon me.

   ^10And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou see
   me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it
   shall not be so.

   ^11And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that,
   behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
   parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
   heaven.

   ^12And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot
   of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more: and he
   took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.

   ^13He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went
   back, and stood by the bank of Jordan;

   ^14And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the
   waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and when he also had
   smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither: and Elisha went
   over.

   ^15And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho saw
   him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. And they came
   to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.

   ^16And they said unto him, Behold now, there be with thy servants fifty
   strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest
   peradventure the Spirit of the Lord hath taken him up, and cast him
   upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not
   send.

   ^17And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. They
   sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him
   not.

   ^18And when they came again to him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he
   said unto them, Did I not say unto you, Go not?

   ^19And the men of the city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the
   situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is
   naught, and the ground barren.

   ^20And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they
   brought it to him.

   ^21And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the salt
   in there, and said, Thus saith the Lord, I have healed these waters;
   there shall not be from thence any more death or barren land.

   ^22So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying of
   Elisha which he spake.

   ^23And he went up from thence unto Bethel: and as he was going up by
   the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked
   him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.

   ^24And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name
   of the Lord. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and
   tare forty and two children of them.

   ^25And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he returned
   to Samaria.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 3

   Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
   eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years.

   ^2And he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord; but not like his
   father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that his
   father had made.

   ^3Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
   which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.

   ^4And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the king
   of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with
   the wool.

   ^5But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab
   rebelled against the king of Israel.

   ^6And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, and numbered all
   Israel.

   ^7And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The
   king of Moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against
   Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people
   as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.

   ^8And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way
   through the wilderness of Edom.

   ^9So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of
   Edom: and they fetched a compass of seven days' journey: and there was
   no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed them.

   ^10And the king of Israel said, Alas! that the Lord hath called these
   three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab!

   ^11But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that
   we may enquire of the Lord by him? And one of the king of Israel's
   servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which
   poured water on the hands of Elijah.

   ^12And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the Lord is with him. So the king
   of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

   ^13And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with
   thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of
   thy mother. And the king of Israel said unto him, Nay: for the Lord
   hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand
   of Moab.

   ^14And Elisha said, As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand,
   surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king
   of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.

   ^15But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel
   played, that the hand of the Lord came upon him.

   ^16And he said, Thus saith the Lord, Make this valley full of ditches.

   ^17For thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see
   rain; yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye may drink,
   both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

   ^18And this is but a light thing in the sight of the Lord: he will
   deliver the Moabites also into your hand.

   ^19And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and
   shall fell every good tree, and stop all wells of water, and mar every
   good piece of land with stones.

   ^20And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was
   offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the
   country was filled with water.

   ^21And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to fight
   against them, they gathered all that were able to put on armour, and
   upward, and stood in the border.

   ^22And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the
   water, and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as
   blood:

   ^23And they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain, and they
   have smitten one another: now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.

   ^24And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and
   smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they went
   forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country.

   ^25And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast
   every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of
   water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kirharaseth left they the
   stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.

   ^26And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him,
   he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break through
   even unto the king of Edom: but they could not.

   ^27Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead,
   and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there was great
   indignation against Israel: and they departed from him, and returned to
   their own land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 4

   Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the
   prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou
   knowest that thy servant did fear the Lord: and the creditor is come to
   take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.

   ^2And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what
   hast thou in the house? And she said, Thine handmaid hath not any thing
   in the house, save a pot of oil.

   ^3Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours,
   even empty vessels; borrow not a few.

   ^4And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and
   upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou
   shalt set aside that which is full.

   ^5So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons,
   who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.

   ^6And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said unto
   her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is not a
   vessel more. And the oil stayed.

   ^7Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil,
   and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.

   ^8And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great
   woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft
   as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.

   ^9And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is an
   holy man of God, which passeth by us continually.

   ^10Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let us
   set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick:
   and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.

   ^11And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into the
   chamber, and lay there.

   ^12And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when he
   had called her, she stood before him.

   ^13And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been
   careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee?
   wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host?
   And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.

   ^14And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered,
   Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.

   ^15And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in the
   door.

   ^16And he said, About this season, according to the time of life, thou
   shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, thou man of God, do
   not lie unto thine handmaid.

   ^17And the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that Elisha
   had said unto her, according to the time of life.

   ^18And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out to
   his father to the reapers.

   ^19And he said unto his father, My head, my head. And he said to a lad,
   Carry him to his mother.

   ^20And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on
   her knees till noon, and then died.

   ^21And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut
   the door upon him, and went out.

   ^22And she called unto her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee, one
   of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man of
   God, and come again.

   ^23And he said, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither new
   moon, nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.

   ^24Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go
   forward; slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee.

   ^25So she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it
   came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to
   Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that Shunammite:

   ^26Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with
   thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she
   answered, It is well.

   ^27And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by
   the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And the man of God
   said, Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her: and the Lord
   hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.

   ^28Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do not
   deceive me?

   ^29Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in
   thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man, salute him not; and
   if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay my staff upon the
   face of the child.

   ^30And the mother of the child said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy
   soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.

   ^31And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face
   of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he
   went again to meet him, and told him, saying, The child is not awaked.

   ^32And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was dead,
   and laid upon his bed.

   ^33He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed
   unto the Lord.

   ^34And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his
   mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands: and he
   stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed
   warm.

   ^35Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went up,
   and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times, and
   the child opened his eyes.

   ^36And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he called
   her. And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy son.

   ^37Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the
   ground, and took up her son, and went out.

   ^38And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth in the land;
   and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him: and he said unto
   his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of
   the prophets.

   ^39And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild
   vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred
   them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.

   ^40So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they
   were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou man
   of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat thereof.

   ^41But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot; and he
   said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm
   in the pot.

   ^42And there came a man from Baalshalisha, and brought the man of God
   bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of
   corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that they
   may eat.

   ^43And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred
   men? He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith
   the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.

   ^44So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof,
   according to the word of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 5

   Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great man
   with his master, and honourable, because by him the Lord had given
   deliverance unto Syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was
   a leper.

   ^2And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away
   captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on
   Naaman's wife.

   ^3And she said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the
   prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.

   ^4And one went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the
   maid that is of the land of Israel.

   ^5And the king of Syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter unto
   the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten talents of
   silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment.

   ^6And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, Now when
   this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my
   servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.

   ^7And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter,
   that he rent his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make
   alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy?
   wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a quarrel
   against me.

   ^8And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king of
   Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying,
   Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he
   shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.

   ^9So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at the
   door of the house of Elisha.

   ^10And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan
   seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be
   clean.

   ^11But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought, He
   will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the Lord
   his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the leper.

   ^12Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the
   waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned
   and went away in a rage.

   ^13And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My father,
   if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have
   done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be
   clean?

   ^14Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan,
   according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again
   like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

   ^15And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came,
   and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there is no
   God in earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee, take a
   blessing of thy servant.

   ^16But he said, As the Lord liveth, before whom I stand, I will receive
   none. And he urged him to take it; but he refused.

   ^17And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy
   servant two mules' burden of earth? for thy servant will henceforth
   offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto
   the Lord.

   ^18In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth
   into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand,
   and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself in the
   house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing.

   ^19And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a little
   way.

   ^20But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold, my
   master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his hands
   that which he brought: but, as the Lord liveth, I will run after him,
   and take somewhat of him.

   ^21So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running
   after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is
   all well?

   ^22And he said, All is well. My master hath sent me, saying, Behold,
   even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two young men of the
   sons of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and
   two changes of garments.

   ^23And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him, and
   bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments,
   and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them before him.

   ^24And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and
   bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.

   ^25But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto
   him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no
   whither.

   ^26And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when the man
   turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive
   money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and
   sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?

   ^27The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy
   seed for ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as
   snow.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 6

   And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the place
   where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.

   ^2Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a
   beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he
   answered, Go ye.

   ^3And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants. And
   he answered, I will go.

   ^4So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down
   wood.

   ^5But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water: and
   he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.

   ^6And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the place.
   And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim.

   ^7Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand, and
   took it.

   ^8Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel with
   his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.

   ^9And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware that
   thou pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come down.

   ^10And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told
   him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor twice.

   ^11Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for this
   thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye not shew
   me which of us is for the king of Israel?

   ^12And one of his servants said, None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, the
   prophet that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that
   thou speakest in thy bedchamber.

   ^13And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch him.
   And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.

   ^14Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
   and they came by night, and compassed the city about.

   ^15And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone
   forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and
   chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we
   do?

   ^16And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than
   they that be with them.

   ^17And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that
   he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw:
   and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round
   about Elisha.

   ^18And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and
   said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them
   with blindness according to the word of Elisha.

   ^19And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, neither is this the
   city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But he
   led them to Samaria.

   ^20And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that Elisha
   said, Lord, open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And the Lord
   opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in the midst of
   Samaria.

   ^21And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My
   father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?

   ^22And he answered, Thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite
   those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? set
   bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to
   their master.

   ^23And he prepared great provision for them: and when they had eaten
   and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the
   bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

   ^24And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered
   all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.

   ^25And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they besieged
   it, until an ass's head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and
   the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.

   ^26And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried
   a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.

   ^27And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?
   out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?

   ^28And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This
   woman said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we
   will eat my son to morrow.

   ^29So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the
   next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.

   ^30And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman,
   that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the
   people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.

   ^31Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha
   the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.

   ^32But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the
   king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he
   said to the elders, See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take
   away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door, and
   hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master's feet behind
   him?

   ^33And while he yet talked with them, behold, the messenger came down
   unto him: and he said, Behold, this evil is of the Lord; what should I
   wait for the Lord any longer?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 7

   Then Elisha said, Hear ye the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord, To
   morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a
   shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of
   Samaria.

   ^2Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God,
   and said, Behold, if the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this
   thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but
   shalt not eat thereof.

   ^3And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate: and
   they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die?

   ^4If we say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the
   city, and we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also.
   Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if
   they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but
   die.

   ^5And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the Syrians:
   and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of Syria,
   behold, there was no man there.

   ^6For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of
   chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and
   they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us
   the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon
   us.

   ^7Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents,
   and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled
   for their life.

   ^8And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp, they
   went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver,
   and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and entered
   into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid it.

   ^9Then they said one to another, We do not well: this day is a day of
   good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning
   light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore come, that we may
   go and tell the king's household.

   ^10So they came and called unto the porter of the city: and they told
   them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold, there
   was no man there, neither voice of man, but horses tied, and asses
   tied, and the tents as they were.

   ^11And he called the porters; and they told it to the king's house
   within.

   ^12And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants, I will
   now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we be
   hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves in
   the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we shall catch them
   alive, and get into the city.

   ^13And one of his servants answered and said, Let some take, I pray
   thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city,
   (behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it:
   behold, I say, they are even as all the multitude of the Israelites
   that are consumed:) and let us send and see.

   ^14They took therefore two chariot horses; and the king sent after the
   host of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.

   ^15And they went after them unto Jordan: and, lo, all the way was full
   of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their
   haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.

   ^16And the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the Syrians. So a
   measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley
   for a shekel, according to the word of the Lord.

   ^17And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have the
   charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and he
   died, as the man of God had said, who spake when the king came down to
   him.

   ^18And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king,
   saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine
   flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of
   Samaria:

   ^19And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now, behold, if the
   Lord should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said,
   Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.

   ^20And so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the
   gate, and he died.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 8

   Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life,
   saying, Arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn wheresoever
   thou canst sojourn: for the Lord hath called for a famine; and it shall
   also come upon the land seven years.

   ^2And the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of God: and
   she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the
   Philistines seven years.

   ^3And it came to pass at the seven years' end, that the woman returned
   out of the land of the Philistines: and she went forth to cry unto the
   king for her house and for her land.

   ^4And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God,
   saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath
   done.

   ^5And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored a
   dead body to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored
   to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi
   said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom
   Elisha restored to life.

   ^6And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king
   appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was
   hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the
   land, even until now.

   ^7And Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was sick;
   and it was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither.

   ^8And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine hand, and go,
   meet the man of God, and enquire of the Lord by him, saying, Shall I
   recover of this disease?

   ^9So Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of
   every good thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden, and came and stood
   before him, and said, Thy son Benhadad king of Syria hath sent me to
   thee, saying, Shall I recover of this disease?

   ^10And Elisha said unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest certainly
   recover: howbeit the Lord hath shewed me that he shall surely die.

   ^11And he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed: and
   the man of God wept.

   ^12And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I
   know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their
   strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay
   with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women
   with child.

   ^13And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog, that he should do
   this great thing? And Elisha answered, The Lord hath shewed me that
   thou shalt be king over Syria.

   ^14So he departed from Elisha, and came to his master; who said to him,
   What said Elisha to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou
   shouldest surely recover.

   ^15And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth, and
   dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died: and
   Hazael reigned in his stead.

   ^16And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel,
   Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat
   king of Judah began to reign.

   ^17Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he
   reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

   ^18And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of
   Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the
   sight of the Lord.

   ^19Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David his servant's sake,
   as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his children.

   ^20In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a
   king over themselves.

   ^21So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he
   rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and
   the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.

   ^22Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. Then
   Libnah revolted at the same time.

   ^23And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^24And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
   the city of David: and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

   ^25In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did
   Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.

   ^26Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he
   reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah, the
   daughter of Omri king of Israel.

   ^27And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the
   sight of the Lord, as did the house of Ahab: for he was the son in law
   of the house of Ahab.

   ^28And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against Hazael
   king of Syria in Ramothgilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.

   ^29And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which
   the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king
   of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see
   Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 9

   And Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets, and
   said unto him, Gird up thy loins, and take this box of oil in thine
   hand, and go to Ramothgilead:

   ^2And when thou comest thither, look out there Jehu the son of
   Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him arise up from
   among his brethren, and carry him to an inner chamber;

   ^3Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, Thus
   saith the Lord, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the
   door, and flee, and tarry not.

   ^4So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to
   Ramothgilead.

   ^5And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting; and
   he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, Unto which
   of all us? And he said, To thee, O captain.

   ^6And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on his
   head, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I have
   anointed thee king over the people of the Lord, even over Israel.

   ^7And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge
   the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the
   servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel.

   ^8For the whole house of Ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from
   Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
   left in Israel:

   ^9And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son
   of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah:

   ^10And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there
   shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.

   ^11Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said unto
   him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he said
   unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.

   ^12And they said, It is false; tell us now. And he said, Thus and thus
   spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I have anointed thee king
   over Israel.

   ^13Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under
   him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying, Jehu is
   king.

   ^14So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against
   Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ramothgilead, he and all Israel, because of
   Hazael king of Syria.

   ^15But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds
   which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of
   Syria.) And Jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth nor
   escape out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.

   ^16So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay there.
   And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.

   ^17And there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the
   company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram said,
   Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it peace?

   ^18So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said, Thus saith the
   king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What hast thou to do with peace? turn
   thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The messenger came to
   them, but he cometh not again.

   ^19Then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and
   said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What hast
   thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

   ^20And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh
   not again: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of
   Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.

   ^21And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And
   Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his
   chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of
   Naboth the Jezreelite.

   ^22And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace,
   Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy
   mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?

   ^23And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is
   treachery, O Ahaziah.

   ^24And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram
   between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down
   in his chariot.

   ^25Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the
   portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how that,
   when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid this
   burden upon him;

   ^26Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of
   his sons, saith the Lord; and I will requite thee in this plat, saith
   the Lord. Now therefore take and cast him into the plat of ground,
   according to the word of the Lord.

   ^27But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of
   the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also
   in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is by
   Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.

   ^28And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried
   him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David.

   ^29And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to
   reign over Judah.

   ^30And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she
   painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

   ^31And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who
   slew his master?

   ^32And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my
   side? who? And there looked out to him two or three eunuchs.

   ^33And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of her
   blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode her
   under foot.

   ^34And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see now
   this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king's daughter.

   ^35And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the
   skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.

   ^36Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the
   word of the Lord, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite,
   saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel:

   ^37And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the
   field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is
   Jezebel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 10

   And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and sent
   to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to them that
   brought up Ahab's children, saying,

   ^2Now as soon as this letter cometh to you, seeing your master's sons
   are with you, and there are with you chariots and horses, a fenced city
   also, and armour;

   ^3Look even out the best and meetest of your master's sons, and set him
   on his father's throne, and fight for your master's house.

   ^4But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, two kings stood
   not before him: how then shall we stand?

   ^5And he that was over the house, and he that was over the city, the
   elders also, and the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying,
   We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will
   not make any king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.

   ^6Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be
   mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the
   men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this
   time. Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great
   men of the city, which brought them up.

   ^7And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the
   king's sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets,
   and sent him them to Jezreel.

   ^8And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, They have brought
   the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at
   the entering in of the gate until the morning.

   ^9And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and
   said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired against my
   master, and slew him: but who slew all these?

   ^10Know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of
   the Lord, which the Lord spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the
   Lord hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah.

   ^11So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and
   all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left
   him none remaining.

   ^12And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at the
   shearing house in the way,

   ^13Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who
   are ye? And they answered, We are the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go
   down to salute the children of the king and the children of the queen.

   ^14And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew
   them at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither
   left he any of them.

   ^15And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of
   Rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is
   thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab
   answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his
   hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.

   ^16And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. So they
   made him ride in his chariot.

   ^17And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab in
   Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the
   Lord, which he spake to Elijah.

   ^18And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them, Ahab
   served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much.

   ^19Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his
   servants, and all his priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great
   sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live.
   But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy the
   worshippers of Baal.

   ^20And Jehu said, Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. And they
   proclaimed it.

   ^21And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of Baal
   came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they came
   into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full from one end to
   another.

   ^22And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments
   for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth vestments.

   ^23And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of
   Baal, and said unto the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that
   there be here with you none of the servants of the Lord, but the
   worshippers of Baal only.

   ^24And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings, Jehu
   appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom I
   have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his life
   shall be for the life of him.

   ^25And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the
   burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in,
   and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge
   of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to
   the city of the house of Baal.

   ^26And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and
   burned them.

   ^27And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down the house of
   Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day.

   ^28Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.

   ^29Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel
   to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves
   that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

   ^30And the Lord said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in
   executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the
   house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of
   the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.

   ^31But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel
   with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam,
   which made Israel to sin.

   ^32In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote
   them in all the coasts of Israel;

   ^33From Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the
   Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river
   Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.

   ^34Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his
   might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
   of Israel?

   ^35And Jehu slept with his fathers: and they buried him in Samaria. And
   Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.

   ^36And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty and
   eight years.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 11

   And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she
   arose and destroyed all the seed royal.

   ^2But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took
   Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons
   which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in the
   bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.

   ^3And he was with her hid in the house of the Lord six years. And
   Athaliah did reign over the land.

   ^4And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over
   hundreds, with the captains and the guard, and brought them to him into
   the house of the Lord, and made a covenant with them, and took an oath
   of them in the house of the Lord, and shewed them the king's son.

   ^5And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall do; A
   third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be keepers of
   the watch of the king's house;

   ^6And a third part shall be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the
   gate behind the guard: so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it
   be not broken down.

   ^7And two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they
   shall keep the watch of the house of the Lord about the king.

   ^8And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons
   in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be slain:
   and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.

   ^9And the captains over the hundreds did according to all things that
   Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men that
   were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on the
   sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.

   ^10And to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king David's
   spears and shields, that were in the temple of the Lord.

   ^11And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, round
   about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left corner
   of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.

   ^12And he brought forth the king's son, and put the crown upon him, and
   gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him; and
   they clapped their hands, and said, God save the king.

   ^13And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people,
   she came to the people into the temple of the Lord.

   ^14And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the
   manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all the
   people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and Athaliah rent
   her clothes, and cried, Treason, Treason.

   ^15But Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds, the
   officers of the host, and said unto them, Have her forth without the
   ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. For the priest
   had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the Lord.

   ^16And they laid hands on her; and she went by the way by the which the
   horses came into the king's house: and there was she slain.

   ^17And Jehoiada made a covenant between the Lord and the king and the
   people, that they should be the Lord'S people; between the king also
   and the people.

   ^18And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and
   brake it down; his altars and his images brake they in pieces
   thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And
   the priest appointed officers over the house of the Lord.

   ^19And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the captains, and the
   guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king
   from the house of the Lord, and came by the way of the gate of the
   guard to the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.

   ^20And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in quiet:
   and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king's house.

   ^21Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 12

   In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty years
   reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba.

   ^2And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his
   days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.

   ^3But the high places were not taken away: the people still sacrificed
   and burnt incense in the high places.

   ^4And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the dedicated
   things that is brought into the house of the Lord, even the money of
   every one that passeth the account, the money that every man is set at,
   and all the money that cometh into any man's heart to bring into the
   house of the Lord,

   ^5Let the priests take it to them, every man of his acquaintance: and
   let them repair the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach shall
   be found.

   ^6But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king Jehoash
   the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.

   ^7Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other
   priests, and said unto them, Why repair ye not the breaches of the
   house? now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but
   deliver it for the breaches of the house.

   ^8And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people,
   neither to repair the breaches of the house.

   ^9But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of
   it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into
   the house of the Lord: and the priests that kept the door put therein
   all the money that was brought into the house of the Lord.

   ^10And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest,
   that the king's scribe and the high priest came up, and they put up in
   bags, and told the money that was found in the house of the Lord.

   ^11And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that did
   the work, that had the oversight of the house of the Lord: and they
   laid it out to the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the house
   of the Lord,

   ^12And to masons, and hewers of stone, and to buy timber and hewed
   stone to repair the breaches of the house of the Lord, and for all that
   was laid out for the house to repair it.

   ^13Howbeit there were not made for the house of the Lord bowls of
   silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of
   silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the Lord:

   ^14But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the house
   of the Lord.

   ^15Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they
   delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen: for they dealt
   faithfully.

   ^16The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house of
   the Lord: it was the priests'.

   ^17Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and took
   it: and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.

   ^18And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that
   Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had
   dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found
   in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and in the king's house, and
   sent it to Hazael king of Syria: and he went away from Jerusalem.

   ^19And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^20And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in the
   house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.

   ^21For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer,
   his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with his
   fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 13

   In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king of
   Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria,
   and reigned seventeen years.

   ^2And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and followed
   the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he
   departed not therefrom.

   ^3And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
   delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the hand
   of Benhadad the son of Hazael, all their days.

   ^4And Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened unto him: for
   he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria oppressed
   them.

   ^5(And the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under
   the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in their
   tents, as beforetime.

   ^6Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of
   Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained
   the grove also in Samaria.)

   ^7Neither did he leave of the people to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen,
   and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the king of Syria had
   destroyed them, and had made them like the dust by threshing.

   ^8Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his
   might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
   of Israel?

   ^9And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria:
   and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

   ^10In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began Jehoash
   the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned
   sixteen years.

   ^11And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord; he departed
   not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel
   sin: but he walked therein.

   ^12And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his
   might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not
   written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^13And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne:
   and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

   ^14Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And
   Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face,
   and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the
   horsemen thereof.

   ^15And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows. And he took unto him
   bow and arrows.

   ^16And he said to the king of Israel, Put thine hand upon the bow. And
   he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king's
   hands.

   ^17And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then Elisha
   said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, The arrow of the Lord'S
   deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria: for thou shalt
   smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.

   ^18And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said unto the
   king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and stayed.

   ^19And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest have
   smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till thou
   hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.

   ^20And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the Moabites
   invaded the land at the coming in of the year.

   ^21And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they
   spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of
   Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha,
   he revived, and stood up on his feet.

   ^22But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.

   ^23And the Lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and
   had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and
   Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his
   presence as yet.

   ^24So Hazael king of Syria died; and Ben- hadad his son reigned in his
   stead.

   ^25And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of
   Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the
   hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash beat him, and
   recovered the cities of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 14

   In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned
   Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.

   ^2He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and reigned
   twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan
   of Jerusalem.

   ^3And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet not
   like David his father: he did according to all things as Joash his
   father did.

   ^4Howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people did
   sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.

   ^5And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his
   hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.

   ^6But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto that
   which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the Lord
   commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the
   children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every
   man shall be put to death for his own sin.

   ^7He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took Selah by
   war, and called the name of it Joktheel unto this day.

   ^8Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of
   Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the
   face.

   ^9And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying,
   The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon,
   saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild
   beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

   ^10Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up:
   glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to thy
   hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?

   ^11But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went
   up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at
   Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

   ^12And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every
   man to their tents.

   ^13And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of
   Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth- shemesh, and came to Jerusalem,
   and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the
   corner gate, four hundred cubits.

   ^14And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were
   found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king's
   house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.

   ^15Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and
   how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the
   book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^16And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with
   the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.

   ^17And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of
   Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

   ^18And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the
   book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^19Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled to
   Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.

   ^20And they brought him on horses: and he was buried at Jerusalem with
   his fathers in the city of David.

   ^21And all the people of Judah took Azariah, which was sixteen years
   old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.

   ^22He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept
   with his fathers.

   ^23In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah
   Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria, and
   reigned forty and one years.

   ^24And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed
   not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to
   sin.

   ^25He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the
   sea of the plain, according to the word of the Lord God of Israel,
   which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai,
   the prophet, which was of Gathhepher.

   ^26For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter:
   for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel.

   ^27And the Lord said not that he would blot out the name of Israel from
   under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of
   Joash.

   ^28Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his
   might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which
   belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book of the
   chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^29And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel;
   and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 15

   In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Azariah
   son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.

   ^2Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned two
   and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecholiah of
   Jerusalem.

   ^3And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that his father Amaziah had done;

   ^4Save that the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and
   burnt incense still on the high places.

   ^5And the Lord smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of
   his death, and dwelt in a several house. And Jotham the king's son was
   over the house, judging the people of the land.

   ^6And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^7So Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his
   fathers in the city of David: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

   ^8In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zachariah
   the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.

   ^9And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his
   fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
   Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

   ^10And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him
   before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

   ^11And the rest of the acts of Zachariah, behold, they are written in
   the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

   ^12This was the word of the Lord which he spake unto Jehu, saying, Thy
   sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth generation. And
   so it came to pass.

   ^13Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and thirtieth
   year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in Samaria.

   ^14For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to
   Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him,
   and reigned in his stead.

   ^15And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he
   made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the
   kings of Israel.

   ^16Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the
   coasts thereof from Tirzah: because they opened not to him, therefore
   he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped
   up.

   ^17In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began
   Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in
   Samaria.

   ^18And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed
   not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
   Israel to sin.

   ^19And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem gave
   Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to
   confirm the kingdom in his hand.

   ^20And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men
   of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of
   Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in
   the land.

   ^21And the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

   ^22And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned in
   his stead.

   ^23In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son of
   Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two years.

   ^24And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed
   not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

   ^25But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against
   him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, with
   Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites: and he
   killed him, and reigned in his room.

   ^26And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold,
   they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

   ^27In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son
   of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty
   years.

   ^28And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed
   not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

   ^29In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglathpileser king of
   Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abel-Bethmaachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh,
   and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and
   carried them captive to Assyria.

   ^30And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son
   of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in
   the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.

   ^31And the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they
   are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

   ^32In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel began
   Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.

   ^33Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he
   reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerusha,
   the daughter of Zadok.

   ^34And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord: he did
   according to all that his father Uzziah had done.

   ^35Howbeit the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and
   burned incense still in the high places. He built the higher gate of
   the house of the Lord.

   ^36Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^37In those days the Lord began to send against Judah Rezin the king of
   Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.

   ^38And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
   in the city of David his father: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 16

   In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the son of
   Jotham king of Judah began to reign.

   ^2Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen
   years in Jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the sight of
   the Lord his God, like David his father.

   ^3But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, yea, and made his
   son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the
   heathen, whom the Lord cast out from before the children of Israel.

   ^4And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the
   hills, and under every green tree.

   ^5Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel
   came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged Ahaz, but could not
   overcome him.

   ^6At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drave
   the Jews from Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there
   unto this day.

   ^7So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, saying, I
   am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the hand of the
   king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up
   against me.

   ^8And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the
   Lord, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a
   present to the king of Assyria.

   ^9And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of Assyria
   went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it
   captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.

   ^10And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglathpileser king of
   Assyria, and saw an altar that was at Damascus: and king Ahaz sent to
   Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it,
   according to all the workmanship thereof.

   ^11And Urijah the priest built an altar according to all that king Ahaz
   had sent from Damascus: so Urijah the priest made it against king Ahaz
   came from Damascus.

   ^12And when the king was come from Damascus, the king saw the altar:
   and the king approached to the altar, and offered thereon.

   ^13And he burnt his burnt offering and his meat offering, and poured
   his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings,
   upon the altar.

   ^14And he brought also the brasen altar, which was before the Lord,
   from the forefront of the house, from between the altar and the house
   of the Lord, and put it on the north side of the altar.

   ^15And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the great
   altar burn the morning burnt offering, and the evening meat offering,
   and the king's burnt sacrifice, and his meat offering, with the burnt
   offering of all the people of the land, and their meat offering, and
   their drink offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt
   offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and the brasen altar
   shall be for me to enquire by.

   ^16Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz
   commanded.

   ^17And king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases, and removed the
   laver from off them; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen
   that were under it, and put it upon a pavement of stones.

   ^18And the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and
   the king's entry without, turned he from the house of the Lord for the
   king of Assyria.

   ^19Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written
   in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^20And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in
   the city of David: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 17

   In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of Elah
   to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years.

   ^2And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as
   the kings of Israel that were before him.

   ^3Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became
   his servant, and gave him presents.

   ^4And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had sent
   messengers to So king of Egypt, and brought no present to the king of
   Assyria, as he had done year by year: therefore the king of Assyria
   shut him up, and bound him in prison.

   ^5Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up
   to Samaria, and besieged it three years.

   ^6In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria, and
   carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in Habor
   by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.

   ^7For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned against the
   Lord their God, which had brought them up out of the land of Egypt,
   from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other
   gods,

   ^8And walked in the statutes of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out
   from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which
   they had made.

   ^9And the children of Israel did secretly those things that were not
   right against the Lord their God, and they built them high places in
   all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.

   ^10And they set them up images and groves in every high hill, and under
   every green tree:

   ^11And there they burnt incense in all the high places, as did the
   heathen whom the Lord carried away before them; and wrought wicked
   things to provoke the Lord to anger:

   ^12For they served idols, whereof the Lord had said unto them, Ye shall
   not do this thing.

   ^13Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the
   prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways,
   and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law
   which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants
   the prophets.

   ^14Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks, like
   to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their
   God.

   ^15And they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made with
   their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them; and
   they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the heathen that
   were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them, that
   they should not do like them.

   ^16And they left all the commandments of the Lord their God, and made
   them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and worshipped
   all the host of heaven, and served Baal.

   ^17And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the
   fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do
   evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.

   ^18Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out
   of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.

   ^19Also Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord their God, but
   walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.

   ^20And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them,
   and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them
   out of his sight.

   ^21For he rent Israel from the house of David; and they made Jeroboam
   the son of Nebat king: and Jeroboam drave Israel from following the
   Lord, and made them sin a great sin.

   ^22For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which
   he did; they departed not from them;

   ^23Until the Lord removed Israel out of his sight, as he had said by
   all his servants the prophets. So was Israel carried away out of their
   own land to Assyria unto this day.

   ^24And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah,
   and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in
   the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they
   possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.

   ^25And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they
   feared not the Lord: therefore the Lord sent lions among them, which
   slew some of them.

   ^26Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations
   which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not
   the manner of the God of the land: therefore he hath sent lions among
   them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of
   the God of the land.

   ^27Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of the
   priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell there,
   and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land.

   ^28Then one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came
   and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord.

   ^29Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the
   houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation
   in their cities wherein they dwelt.

   ^30And the men of Babylon made Succothbenoth, and the men of Cuth made
   Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,

   ^31And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt
   their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of
   Sepharvaim.

   ^32So they feared the Lord, and made unto themselves of the lowest of
   them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the
   houses of the high places.

   ^33They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, after the manner of
   the nations whom they carried away from thence.

   ^34Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not the
   Lord, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances,
   or after the law and commandment which the Lord commanded the children
   of Jacob, whom he named Israel;

   ^35With whom the Lord had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye
   shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them,
   nor sacrifice to them:

   ^36But the Lord, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great
   power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him shall ye
   worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.

   ^37And the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the
   commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for
   evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

   ^38And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget;
   neither shall ye fear other gods.

   ^39But the Lord your God ye shall fear; and he shall deliver you out of
   the hand of all your enemies.

   ^40Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former
   manner.

   ^41So these nations feared the Lord, and served their graven images,
   both their children, and their children's children: as did their
   fathers, so do they unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 18

   Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of
   Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.

   ^2Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he
   reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was
   Abi, the daughter of Zachariah.

   ^3And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that David his father did.

   ^4He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the
   groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had made: for
   unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he
   called it Nehushtan.

   ^5He trusted in the Lord God of Israel; so that after him was none like
   him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.

   ^6For he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him, but
   kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.

   ^7And the Lord was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went
   forth: and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not.

   ^8He smote the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof,
   from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.

   ^9And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was
   the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser
   king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.

   ^10And at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth year
   of Hezekiah, that is the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria
   was taken.

   ^11And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and put
   them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of
   the Medes:

   ^12Because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but
   transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the Lord
   commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.

   ^13Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of
   Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took them.

   ^14And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish,
   saying, I have offended; return from me: that which thou puttest on me
   will I bear. And the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of
   Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.

   ^15And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of
   the Lord, and in the treasures of the king's house.

   ^16At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the
   temple of the Lord, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah
   had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.

   ^17And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris and Rabshakeh from
   Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great host against Jerusalem. And they
   went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they were come up, they came
   and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway of
   the fuller's field.

   ^18And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim
   the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna the
   scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.

   ^19And Rab- shakeh said unto them, Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith
   the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein
   thou trustest?

   ^20Thou sayest, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel and
   strength for the war. Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest
   against me?

   ^21Now, behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even
   upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and
   pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that trust on him.

   ^22But if ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God: is not that he,
   whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and hath
   said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in
   Jerusalem?

   ^23Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my lord the king of
   Assyria, and I will deliver thee two thousand horses, if thou be able
   on thy part to set riders upon them.

   ^24How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of
   my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for
   horsemen?

   ^25Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it?
   The Lord said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.

   ^26Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah, unto
   Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language;
   for we understand it: and talk not with us in the Jews' language in the
   ears of the people that are on the wall.

   ^27But Rabshakeh said unto them, Hath my master sent me to thy master,
   and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men which
   sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own
   piss with you?

   ^28Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews'
   language, and spake, saying, Hear the word of the great king, the king
   of Assyria:

   ^29Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not
   be able to deliver you out of his hand:

   ^30Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord
   will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be delivered into the
   hand of the king of Assyria.

   ^31Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an
   agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then eat ye
   every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye
   every one the waters of his cistern:

   ^32Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land
   of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive
   and of honey, that ye may live, and not die: and hearken not unto
   Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying, The Lord will deliver us.

   ^33Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of
   the hand of the king of Assyria?

   ^34Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of
   Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out of mine
   hand?

   ^35Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have
   delivered their country out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver
   Jerusalem out of mine hand?

   ^36But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for
   the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

   ^37Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household,
   and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to
   Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 19

   And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his
   clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of
   the Lord.

   ^2And he sent Eliakim, which was over the household, and Shebna the
   scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to
   Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

   ^3And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
   trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy: for the children are come to the
   birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

   ^4It may be the Lord thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh, whom
   the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God;
   and will reprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard: wherefore
   lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.

   ^5So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

   ^6And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus
   saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with
   which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

   ^7Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and
   shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword
   in his own land.

   ^8So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against
   Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

   ^9And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is
   come out to fight against thee: he sent messengers again unto Hezekiah,
   saying,

   ^10Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy
   God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be
   delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

   ^11Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all
   lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?

   ^12Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have
   destroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden
   which were in Thelasar?

   ^13Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of
   the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah?

   ^14And Hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the messengers, and
   read it: and Hezekiah went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it
   before the Lord.

   ^15And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said, O Lord God of Israel,
   which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou
   alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and
   earth.

   ^16Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, Lord, thine eyes, and see:
   and hear the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent him to reproach the
   living God.

   ^17Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations
   and their lands,

   ^18And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but
   the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed
   them.

   ^19Now therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out of
   his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the
   Lord God, even thou only.

   ^20Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the
   Lord God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed to me against
   Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.

   ^21This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning him; The
   virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
   scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

   ^22Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou
   exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the
   Holy One of Israel.

   ^23By thy messengers thou hast reproached the Lord, and hast said, With
   the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the
   mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar
   trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into
   the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel.

   ^24I have digged and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet
   have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.

   ^25Hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it, and of ancient
   times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
   shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps.

   ^26Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed
   and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as the green
   herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be
   grown up.

   ^27But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy
   rage against me.

   ^28Because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into mine
   ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy
   lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

   ^29And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such
   things as grow of themselves, and in the second year that which
   springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and
   plant vineyards, and eat the fruits thereof.

   ^30And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall yet
   again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.

   ^31For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape
   out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.

   ^32Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He
   shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
   before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.

   ^33By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not
   come into this city, saith the Lord.

   ^34For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and for
   my servant David's sake.

   ^35And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went out,
   and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five
   thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were
   all dead corpses.

   ^36So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and
   dwelt at Nineveh.

   ^37And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch
   his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the
   sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia. And Esar- haddon his
   son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 20

   In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah the
   son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set
   thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.

   ^2Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord,
   saying,

   ^3I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in
   truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
   sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

   ^4And it came to pass, afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court,
   that the word of the Lord came to him, saying,

   ^5Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people, Thus saith
   the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have
   seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt
   go up unto the house of the Lord.

   ^6And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and I will deliver thee
   and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend
   this city for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

   ^7And Isaiah said, Take a lump of figs. And they took and laid it on
   the boil, and he recovered.

   ^8And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What shall be the sign that the Lord
   will heal me, and that I shall go up into the house of the Lord the
   third day?

   ^9And Isaiah said, This sign shalt thou have of the Lord, that the Lord
   will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten
   degrees, or go back ten degrees?

   ^10And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down
   ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.

   ^11And Isaiah the prophet cried unto the Lord: and he brought the
   shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of
   Ahaz.

   ^12At that time Berodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,
   sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard that
   Hezekiah had been sick.

   ^13And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and shewed them all the house of
   his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
   precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was
   found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his
   dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

   ^14Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him,
   What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah
   said, They are come from a far country, even from Babylon.

   ^15And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
   answered, All the things that are in mine house have they seen: there
   is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

   ^16And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord.

   ^17Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
   which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried
   into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.

   ^18And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget,
   shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the
   king of Babylon.

   ^19Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which
   thou hast spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if peace and truth be in
   my days?

   ^20And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he
   made a pool, and a conduit, and brought water into the city, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^21And Hezekiah slept with his fathers: and Manasseh his son reigned in
   his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 21

   Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned fifty
   and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hephzibah.

   ^2And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the
   abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the children
   of Israel.

   ^3For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had
   destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did
   Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served
   them.

   ^4And he built altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said,
   In Jerusalem will I put my name.

   ^5And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of
   the house of the Lord.

   ^6And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and
   used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he
   wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to
   anger.

   ^7And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house,
   of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house,
   and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will
   I put my name for ever:

   ^8Neither will I make the feet of Israel move any more out of the land
   which I gave their fathers; only if they will observe to do according
   to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my
   servant Moses commanded them.

   ^9But they hearkened not: and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil
   than did the nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children of
   Israel.

   ^10And the Lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying,

   ^11Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and
   hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, which were before
   him, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols:

   ^12Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I am bringing
   such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both
   his ears shall tingle.

   ^13And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the
   plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth
   a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

   ^14And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver them
   into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and a
   spoil to all their enemies;

   ^15Because they have done that which was evil in my sight, and have
   provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth out of
   Egypt, even unto this day.

   ^16Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled
   Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made
   Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.

   ^17Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his
   sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
   of the kings of Judah?

   ^18And Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of
   his own house, in the garden of Uzza: and Amon his son reigned in his
   stead.

   ^19Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth,
   the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.

   ^20And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his
   father Manasseh did.

   ^21And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and served
   the idols that his father served, and worshipped them:

   ^22And he forsook the Lord God of his fathers, and walked not in the
   way of the Lord.

   ^23And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and slew the king in
   his own house.

   ^24And the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against
   king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his
   stead.

   ^25Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written
   in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^26And he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza: and Josiah
   his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 22

   Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
   thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah,
   the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.

   ^2And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked
   in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the right
   hand or to the left.

   ^3And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the
   king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe,
   to the house of the Lord, saying,

   ^4Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the silver which is
   brought into the house of the Lord, which the keepers of the door have
   gathered of the people:

   ^5And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work, that
   have the oversight of the house of the Lord: and let them give it to
   the doers of the work which is in the house of the Lord, to repair the
   breaches of the house,

   ^6Unto carpenters, and builders, and masons, and to buy timber and hewn
   stone to repair the house.

   ^7Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was
   delivered into their hand, because they dealt faithfully.

   ^8And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have
   found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah gave
   the book to Shaphan, and he read it.

   ^9And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word
   again, and said, Thy servants have gathered the money that was found in
   the house, and have delivered it into the hand of them that do the
   work, that have the oversight of the house of the Lord.

   ^10And Shaphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest
   hath delivered me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

   ^11And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book
   of the law, that he rent his clothes.

   ^12And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of
   Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and
   Asahiah a servant of the king's, saying,

   ^13Go ye, enquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all
   Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is
   the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our fathers
   have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto
   all that which is written concerning us.

   ^14So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and
   Asahiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son
   of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in
   Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.

   ^15And she said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell the
   man that sent you to me,

   ^16Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and
   upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the
   king of Judah hath read:

   ^17Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other
   gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their
   hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and
   shall not be quenched.

   ^18But to the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the Lord, thus
   shall ye say to him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, As touching the
   words which thou hast heard;

   ^19Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before
   the Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and
   against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation
   and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have
   heard thee, saith the Lord.

   ^20Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou
   shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see
   all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the
   king word again.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 23

   And the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders of Judah
   and of Jerusalem.

   ^2And the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of
   Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests,
   and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great: and he read
   in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found
   in the house of the Lord.

   ^3And the king stood by a pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord,
   to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments and his
   testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all their soul,
   to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book.
   And all the people stood to the covenant.

   ^4And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of
   the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of
   the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for
   the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them without
   Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of them unto
   Bethel.

   ^5And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had
   ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and
   in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned incense unto
   Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the
   host of heaven.

   ^6And he brought out the grove from the house of the Lord, without
   Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron,
   and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the
   graves of the children of the people.

   ^7And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the house
   of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove.

   ^8And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and
   defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba
   to Beersheba, and brake down the high places of the gates that were in
   the entering in of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which
   were on a man's left hand at the gate of the city.

   ^9Nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the altar
   of the Lord in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened bread
   among their brethren.

   ^10And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of
   Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through
   the fire to Molech.

   ^11And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the
   sun, at the entering in of the house of the Lord, by the chamber of
   Nathanmelech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned the
   chariots of the sun with fire.

   ^12And the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz,
   which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had
   made in the two courts of the house of the Lord, did the king beat
   down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into
   the brook Kidron.

   ^13And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the
   right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel
   had builded for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidonians, and for
   Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom the abomination
   of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.

   ^14And he brake in pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and
   filled their places with the bones of men.

   ^15Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, and the high place which
   Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, both that
   altar and the high place he brake down, and burned the high place, and
   stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove.

   ^16And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were
   there in the mount, and sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchres,
   and burned them upon the altar, and polluted it, according to the word
   of the Lord which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these
   words.

   ^17Then he said, What title is that that I see? And the men of the city
   told him, It is the sepulchre of the man of God, which came from Judah,
   and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the altar of
   Bethel.

   ^18And he said, Let him alone; let no man move his bones. So they let
   his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of
   Samaria.

   ^19And all the houses also of the high places that were in the cities
   of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord to
   anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that
   he had done in Bethel.

   ^20And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there upon
   the altars, and burned men's bones upon them, and returned to
   Jerusalem.

   ^21And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the passover
   unto the Lord your God, as it is written in the book of this covenant.

   ^22Surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of the
   judges that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel,
   nor of the kings of Judah;

   ^23But in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, wherein this passover was
   holden to the Lord in Jerusalem.

   ^24Moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and the
   images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in the
   land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might
   perform the words of the law which were written in the book that
   Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the Lord.

   ^25And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the
   Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might,
   according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any
   like him.

   ^26Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great
   wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all
   the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal.

   ^27And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I
   have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have
   chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there.

   ^28Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^29In his days Pharaohnechoh king of Egypt went up against the king of
   Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josiah went against him; and
   he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him.

   ^30And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and
   brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the
   people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him,
   and made him king in his father's stead.

   ^31Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and
   he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
   Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

   ^32And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that his fathers had done.

   ^33And Pharaohnechoh put him in bands at Riblah in the land of Hamath,
   that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a tribute of
   an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.

   ^34And Pharaohnechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of
   Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz
   away: and he came to Egypt, and died there.

   ^35And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed
   the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh: he
   exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one
   according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaohnechoh.

   ^36Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and
   he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
   Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.

   ^37And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that his fathers had done.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 24

   In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim
   became his servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against
   him.

   ^2And the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the
   Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon,
   and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the
   Lord, which he spake by his servants the prophets.

   ^3Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove
   them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that
   he did;

   ^4And also for the innocent blood that he shed: for he filled Jerusalem
   with innocent blood; which the Lord would not pardon.

   ^5Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

   ^6So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers: and Jehoiachin his son reigned
   in his stead.

   ^7And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land: for
   the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river
   Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.

   ^8Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother's name was Nehushta,
   the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.

   ^9And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to
   all that his father had done.

   ^10At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up
   against Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.

   ^11And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city, and his
   servants did besiege it.

   ^12And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon,
   he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his
   officers: and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his
   reign.

   ^13And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the
   Lord, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the
   vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of
   the Lord, as the Lord had said.

   ^14And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the
   mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen
   and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the
   land.

   ^15And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king's mother,
   and the king's wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the land,
   those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.

   ^16And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and craftsmen and
   smiths a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, even them the
   king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.

   ^17And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in
   his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.

   ^18Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal,
   the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

   ^19And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that Jehoiakim had done.

   ^20For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and
   Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah
   rebelled against the king of Babylon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Kings 25

   And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month,
   in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
   came, he, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it;
   and they built forts against it round about.

   ^2And the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

   ^3And on the ninth day of the fourth month the famine prevailed in the
   city, and there was no bread for the people of the land.

   ^4And the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled by night by
   the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the king's garden:
   (now the Chaldees were against the city round about:) and the king went
   the way toward the plain.

   ^5And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, and overtook him
   in the plains of Jericho: and all his army were scattered from him.

   ^6So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon to
   Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.

   ^7And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the
   eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him
   to Babylon.

   ^8And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which is the
   nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, came
   Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon,
   unto Jerusalem:

   ^9And he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king's house, and all the
   houses of Jerusalem, and every great man's house burnt he with fire.

   ^10And all the army of the Chaldees, that were with the captain of the
   guard, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about.

   ^11Now the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the
   fugitives that fell away to the king of Babylon, with the remnant of
   the multitude, did Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carry away.

   ^12But the captain of the guard left of the poor of the land to be
   vinedressers and husbandmen.

   ^13And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and the
   bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord, did the
   Chaldees break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to Babylon.

   ^14And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons, and
   all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.

   ^15And the firepans, and the bowls, and such things as were of gold, in
   gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took away.

   ^16The two pillars, one sea, and the bases which Solomon had made for
   the house of the Lord; the brass of all these vessels was without
   weight.

   ^17The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the chapiter
   upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three cubits; and the
   wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter round about, all of
   brass: and like unto these had the second pillar with wreathen work.

   ^18And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and
   Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:

   ^19And out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of
   war, and five men of them that were in the king's presence, which were
   found in the city, and the principal scribe of the host, which mustered
   the people of the land, and threescore men of the people of the land
   that were found in the city:

   ^20And Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took these, and brought them to
   the king of Babylon to Riblah:

   ^21And the king of Babylon smote them, and slew them at Riblah in the
   land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away out of their land.

   ^22And as for the people that remained in the land of Judah, whom
   Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made
   Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, ruler.

   ^23And when all the captains of the armies, they and their men, heard
   that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, there came to
   Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the
   son of Careah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and
   Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

   ^24And Gedaliah sware to them, and to their men, and said unto them,
   Fear not to be the servants of the Chaldees: dwell in the land, and
   serve the king of Babylon; and it shall be well with you.

   ^25But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten men
   with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and the Jews and the
   Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah.

   ^26And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the
   armies, arose, and came to Egypt: for they were afraid of the Chaldees.

   ^27And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity
   of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the seven and
   twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the
   year that he began to reign did lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of
   Judah out of prison;

   ^28And he spake kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of
   the kings that were with him in Babylon;

   ^29And changed his prison garments: and he did eat bread continually
   before him all the days of his life.

   ^30And his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the king, a
   daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The First Book of the

Chronicles
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 1

   Adam, Sheth, Enosh,

   ^2Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered,

   ^3Henoch, Methuselah, Lamech,

   ^4Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

   ^5The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and
   Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.

   ^6And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.

   ^7And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.

   ^8The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.

   ^9And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and
   Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.

   ^10And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth.

   ^11And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Napthtuhim,

   ^12And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and
   Caphthorim.

   ^13And Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth,

   ^14The Jebusite also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,

   ^15And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,

   ^16And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.

   ^17The sons of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram,
   and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.

   ^18And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber.

   ^19And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg;
   because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother's name was
   Joktan.

   ^20And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,

   ^21Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah,

   ^22And Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,

   ^23And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of
   Joktan.

   ^24Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,

   ^25Eber, Peleg, Reu,

   ^26Serug, Nahor, Terah,

   ^27Abram; the same is Abraham.

   ^28The sons of Abraham; Isaac, and Ishmael.

   ^29These are their generations: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth;
   then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,

   ^30Mishma and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,

   ^31Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.

   ^32Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bare Zimran, and
   Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of
   Jokshan; Sheba, and Dedan.

   ^33And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida, and
   Eldaah. All these are the sons of Keturah.

   ^34And Abraham begat Isaac. The sons of Isaac; Esau and Israel.

   ^35The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.

   ^36The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and
   Timna, and Amalek.

   ^37The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.

   ^38And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and
   Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan.

   ^39And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna was Lotan's
   sister.

   ^40The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam.
   And the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.

   ^41The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the sons of Dishon; Amram, and Eshban,
   and Ithran, and Cheran.

   ^42The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of Dishan;
   Uz, and Aran.

   ^43Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before any
   king reigned over the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and the
   name of his city was Dinhabah.

   ^44And when Bela was dead, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in
   his stead.

   ^45And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned
   in his stead.

   ^46And when Husham was dead, Hadad the son of Bedad, which smote Midian
   in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city
   was Avith.

   ^47And when Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.

   ^48And when Samlah was dead, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in
   his stead.

   ^49And when Shaul was dead, Baalhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his
   stead.

   ^50And when Baalhanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the
   name of his city was Pai; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the
   daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.

   ^51Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke
   Aliah, duke Jetheth,

   ^52Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,

   ^53Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,

   ^54Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These are the dukes of Edom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 2

   These are the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
   Issachar, and Zebulun,

   ^2Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

   ^3The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: which three were born
   unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, the firstborn
   of Judah, was evil in the sight of the Lord; and he slew him.

   ^4And Tamar his daughter in law bare him Pharez and Zerah. All the sons
   of Judah were five.

   ^5The sons of Pharez; Hezron, and Hamul.

   ^6And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and
   Dara: five of them in all.

   ^7And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who
   transgressed in the thing accursed.

   ^8And the sons of Ethan; Azariah.

   ^9The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmeel, and Ram,
   and Chelubai.

   ^10And Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon, prince of the
   children of Judah;

   ^11And Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz,

   ^12And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jesse,

   ^13And Jesse begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and
   Shimma the third,

   ^14Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,

   ^15Ozem the sixth, David the seventh:

   ^16Whose sisters were Zeruiah, and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah;
   Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.

   ^17And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa was Jether the
   Ishmeelite.

   ^18And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and
   of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.

   ^19And when Azubah was dead, Caleb took unto him Ephrath, which bare
   him Hur.

   ^20And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.

   ^21And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of
   Gilead, whom he married when he was threescore years old; and she bare
   him Segub.

   ^22And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of
   Gilead.

   ^23And he took Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, from them,
   with Kenath, and the towns thereof, even threescore cities. All these
   belonged to the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.

   ^24And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephratah, then Abiah
   Hezron's wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.

   ^25And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the
   firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah.

   ^26Jerahmeel had also another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the
   mother of Onam.

   ^27And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and
   Jamin, and Eker.

   ^28And the sons of Onam were, Shammai, and Jada. And the sons of
   Shammai; Nadab, and Abishur.

   ^29And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him
   Ahban, and Molid.

   ^30And the sons of Nadab; Seled, and Appaim: but Seled died without
   children.

   ^31And the sons of Appaim; Ishi. And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And the
   children of Sheshan; Ahlai.

   ^32And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai; Jether and Jonathan:
   and Jether died without children.

   ^33And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of
   Jerahmeel.

   ^34Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant,
   an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.

   ^35And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and she
   bare him Attai.

   ^36And Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad,

   ^37And Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed,

   ^38And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu begat Azariah,

   ^39And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat Eleasah,

   ^40And Eleasah begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Shallum,

   ^41And Shallum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama.

   ^42Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha his
   firstborn, which was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the
   father of Hebron.

   ^43And the sons of Hebron; Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.

   ^44And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat
   Shammai.

   ^45And the son of Shammai was Maon: and Maon was the father of Bethzur.

   ^46And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez: and
   Haran begat Gazez.

   ^47And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet,
   and Ephah, and Shaaph.

   ^48Maachah, Caleb's concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah.

   ^49She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of
   Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was
   Achsa.

   ^50These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, the firstborn of
   Ephratah; Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim,

   ^51Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth- gader.

   ^52And Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim had sons; Haroeh, and half of
   the Manahethites.

   ^53And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites,
   and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites,
   and the Eshtaulites.

   ^54The sons of Salma; Bethlehem, and the Netophathites, Ataroth, the
   house of Joab, and half of the Manahethites, the Zorites.

   ^55And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the
   Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites
   that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 3

   Now these were the sons of David, which were born unto him in Hebron;
   the firstborn Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second Daniel, of
   Abigail the Carmelitess:

   ^2The third, Absalom the son of Maachah the daughter of Talmai king of
   Geshur: the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith:

   ^3The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his
   wife.

   ^4These six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven
   years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three
   years.

   ^5And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and
   Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel:

   ^6Ibhar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,

   ^7And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

   ^8And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.

   ^9These were all the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines,
   and Tamar their sister.

   ^10And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abia his son, Asa his son,
   Jehoshaphat his son,

   ^11Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,

   ^12Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,

   ^13Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,

   ^14Amon his son, Josiah his son.

   ^15And the sons of Josiah were, the firstborn Johanan, the second
   Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.

   ^16And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.

   ^17And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, Salathiel his son,

   ^18Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and
   Nedabiah.

   ^19And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zerubbabel, and Shimei: and the sons
   of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister:

   ^20And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed,
   five.

   ^21And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of
   Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of
   Shechaniah.

   ^22And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah; and the sons of Shemaiah;
   Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.

   ^23And the sons of Neariah; Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three.

   ^24And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah,
   and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 4

   The sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.

   ^2And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai
   and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.

   ^3And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash:
   and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi:

   ^4And Penuel the father of Gedor and Ezer the father of Hushah. These
   are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of
   Bethlehem.

   ^5And Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.

   ^6And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari.
   These were the sons of Naarah.

   ^7And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.

   ^8And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son
   of Harum.

   ^9And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother
   called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bare him with sorrow.

   ^10And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest
   bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be
   with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not
   grieve me! And God granted him that which he requested.

   ^11And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which was the father of
   Eshton.

   ^12And Eshton begat Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of
   Ir-nahash. These are the men of Rechah.

   ^13And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of
   Othniel; Hathath.

   ^14And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of
   the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.

   ^15And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and
   the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.

   ^16And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.

   ^17And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon:
   and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.

   ^18And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the
   father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the
   sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.

   ^19And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of
   Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.

   ^20And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and
   Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth.

   ^21The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah,
   and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of
   them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea,

   ^22And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had
   the dominion in Moab, and Jashubi-lehem. And these are ancient things.

   ^23These were the potters, and those that dwelt among plants and
   hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work.

   ^24The sons of Simeon were, Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul:

   ^25Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.

   ^26And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his
   son.

   ^27And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brethren had
   not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the
   children of Judah.

   ^28And they dwelt at Beersheba, and Moladah, and Hazarshual,

   ^29And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,

   ^30And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,

   ^31And at Bethmarcaboth, and Hazar-susim, and at Beth- birei, and at
   Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David.

   ^32And their villages were, Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and
   Ashan, five cities:

   ^33And all their villages that were round about the same cities, unto
   Baal. These were their habitations, and their genealogy.

   ^34And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah,

   ^35And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son
   of Asiel,

   ^36And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel,
   and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,

   ^37And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah,
   the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah;

   ^38These mentioned by their names were princes in their families: and
   the house of their fathers increased greatly.

   ^39And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side of
   the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.

   ^40And they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and
   quiet, and peaceable; for they of Ham had dwelt there of old.

   ^41And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of
   Judah, and smote their tents, and the habitations that were found
   there, and destroyed them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in their
   rooms: because there was pasture there for their flocks.

   ^42And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went
   to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and
   Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.

   ^43And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and
   dwelt there unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 5

   Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the
   firstborn; but, forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his
   birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the
   genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.

   ^2For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief
   ruler; but the birthright was Joseph's:)

   ^3The sons, I say, of Reuben the firstborn of Israel were, Hanoch, and
   Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.

   ^4The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,

   ^5Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal his son,

   ^6Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away
   captive: he was prince of the Reubenites.

   ^7And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their
   generations was reckoned, were the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,

   ^8And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who
   dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baalmeon:

   ^9And eastward he inhabited unto the entering in of the wilderness from
   the river Euphrates: because their cattle were multiplied in the land
   of Gilead.

   ^10And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who fell
   by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the east
   land of Gilead.

   ^11And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of
   Bashan unto Salchah:

   ^12Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in
   Bashan.

   ^13And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and
   Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.

   ^14These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of
   Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai,
   the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;

   ^15Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of the house of their
   fathers.

   ^16And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in her towns, and in all the
   suburbs of Sharon, upon their borders.

   ^17All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of
   Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.

   ^18The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh,
   of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with
   bow, and skilful in war, were four and forty thousand seven hundred and
   threescore, that went out to the war.

   ^19And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and
   Nodab.

   ^20And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were delivered
   into their hand, and all that were with them: for they cried to God in
   the battle, and he was intreated of them; because they put their trust
   in him.

   ^21And they took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand, and
   of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand, and
   of men an hundred thousand.

   ^22For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. And they
   dwelt in their steads until the captivity.

   ^23And the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land:
   they increased from Bashan unto Baalhermon and Senir, and unto mount
   Hermon.

   ^24And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher,
   and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and
   Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house of
   their fathers.

   ^25And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a
   whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed
   before them.

   ^26And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria,
   and the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them
   away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of
   Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the
   river Gozan, unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 6

   The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

   ^2And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.

   ^3And the children of Amram; Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons
   also of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

   ^4Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua,

   ^5And Abishua begat Bukki, and Bukki begat Uzzi,

   ^6And Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begat Meraioth,

   ^7Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,

   ^8And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimaaz,

   ^9And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan,

   ^10And Johanan begat Azariah, (he it is that executed the priest's
   office in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem:)

   ^11And Azariah begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,

   ^12And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Shallum,

   ^13And Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat Azariah,

   ^14And Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak,

   ^15And Jehozadak went into captivity, when the Lord carried away Judah
   and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

   ^16The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.

   ^17And these be the names of the sons of Gershom; Libni, and Shimei.

   ^18And the sons of Kohath were, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and
   Uzziel.

   ^19The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. And these are the families of
   the Levites according to their fathers.

   ^20Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,

   ^21Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.

   ^22The sons of Kohath; Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,

   ^23Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,

   ^24Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.

   ^25And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth.

   ^26As for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, and Nahath his
   son,

   ^27Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.

   ^28And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah.

   ^29The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his
   son,

   ^30Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

   ^31And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the
   house of the Lord, after that the ark had rest.

   ^32And they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle of
   the congregation with singing, until Solomon had built the house of the
   Lord in Jerusalem: and then they waited on their office according to
   their order.

   ^33And these are they that waited with their children. Of the sons of
   the Kohathites: Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Shemuel,

   ^34The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of
   Toah,

   ^35The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of
   Amasai,

   ^36The son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of
   Zephaniah,

   ^37The son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of
   Korah,

   ^38The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of
   Israel.

   ^39And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the
   son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea,

   ^40The son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah,

   ^41The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,

   ^42The son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,

   ^43The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.

   ^44And their brethren the sons of Merari stood on the left hand: Ethan
   the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,

   ^45The son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,

   ^46The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shamer,

   ^47The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of
   Levi.

   ^48Their brethren also the Levites were appointed unto all manner of
   service of the tabernacle of the house of God.

   ^49But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt offering,
   and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the work of the
   place most holy, and to make an atonement for Israel, according to all
   that Moses the servant of God had commanded.

   ^50And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son,
   Abishua his son,

   ^51Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,

   ^52Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,

   ^53Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.

   ^54Now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles in
   their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites:
   for theirs was the lot.

   ^55And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs
   thereof round about it.

   ^56But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave to
   Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

   ^57And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, namely,
   Hebron, the city of refuge, and Libnah with her suburbs, and Jattir,
   and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs,

   ^58And Hilen with her suburbs, Debir with her suburbs,

   ^59And Ashan with her suburbs, and Bethshemesh with her suburbs:

   ^60And out of the tribe of Benjamin; Geba with her suburbs, and Alemeth
   with her suburbs, and Anathoth with her suburbs. All their cities
   throughout their families were thirteen cities.

   ^61And unto the sons of Kohath, which were left of the family of that
   tribe, were cities given out of the half tribe, namely, out of the half
   tribe of Manasseh, by lot, ten cities.

   ^62And to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of the
   tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
   of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
   cities.

   ^63Unto the sons of Merari were given by lot, throughout their
   families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and
   out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.

   ^64And the children of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with
   their suburbs.

   ^65And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and
   out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the
   children of Benjamin, these cities, which are called by their names.

   ^66And the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of
   their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim.

   ^67And they gave unto them, of the cities of refuge, Shechem in mount
   Ephraim with her suburbs; they gave also Gezer with her suburbs,

   ^68And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs,

   ^69And Aijalon with her suburbs, and Gath- rimmon with her suburbs:

   ^70And out of the half tribe of Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, and
   Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of
   Kohath.

   ^71Unto the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half
   tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, and Ashtaroth with
   her suburbs:

   ^72And out of the tribe of Issachar; Kedesh with her suburbs, Daberath
   with her suburbs,

   ^73And Ramoth with her suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs:

   ^74And out of the tribe of Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon
   with her suburbs,

   ^75And Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs:

   ^76And out of the tribe of Naphtali; Kedesh in Galilee with her
   suburbs, and Hammon with her suburbs, and Kirjathaim with her suburbs.

   ^77Unto the rest of the children of Merari were given out of the tribe
   of Zebulun. Rimmon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs:

   ^78And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of Jordan,
   were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness
   with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs,

   ^79Kedemoth also with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs:

   ^80And out of the tribe of Gad; Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and
   Mahanaim with her suburbs,

   ^81And Heshbon with her suburbs, and Jazer with her suburbs.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 7

   Now the sons of Issachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimrom,
   four.

   ^2And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and
   Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of Tola:
   they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was
   in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred.

   ^3And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael,
   and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: all of them chief men.

   ^4And with them, by their generations, after the house of their
   fathers, were bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand men:
   for they had many wives and sons.

   ^5And their brethren among all the families of Issachar were valiant
   men of might, reckoned in all by their genealogies fourscore and seven
   thousand.

   ^6The sons of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.

   ^7And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and
   Iri, five; heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour;
   and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand and
   thirty and four.

   ^8And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai,
   and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these
   are the sons of Becher.

   ^9And the number of them, after their genealogy by their generations,
   heads of the house of the fathers, mighty men of valour, was twenty
   thousand and two hundred.

   ^10The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and
   Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and
   Ahishahar.

   ^11All these the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers, mighty
   men of valour, were seventeen thousand and two hundred soldiers, fit to
   go out for war and battle.

   ^12Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the sons
   of Aher.

   ^13The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the
   sons of Bilhah.

   ^14The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine the
   Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead:

   ^15And Machir took to wife the sister of Huppim and Shuppim, whose
   sister's name was Maachah;) and the name of the second was Zelophehad:
   and Zelophehad had daughters.

   ^16And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name
   Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam
   and Rakem.

   ^17And the sons of Ulam; Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son
   of Machir, the son of Manasseh.

   ^18And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.

   ^19And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and
   Aniam.

   ^20And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath
   his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son,

   ^21And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom
   the men of Gath that were born in that land slew, because they came
   down to take away their cattle.

   ^22And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to
   comfort him.

   ^23And when he went in to his wife, she conceived, and bare a son, and
   he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.

   ^24(And his daughter was Sherah, who built Bethhoron the nether, and
   the upper, and Uzzen-sherah.)

   ^25And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan
   his son,

   ^26Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,

   ^27Non his son, Jehoshuah his son.

   ^28And their possessions and habitations were, Bethel and the towns
   thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns
   thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns
   thereof:

   ^29And by the borders of the children of Manasseh, Bethshean and her
   towns, Taanach and her towns, Megiddo and her towns, Dor and her towns.
   In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel.

   ^30The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and
   Serah their sister.

   ^31And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of
   Birzavith.

   ^32And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their
   sister.

   ^33And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are
   the children of Japhlet.

   ^34And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.

   ^35And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh,
   and Amal.

   ^36The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and
   Imrah,

   ^37Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.

   ^38And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.

   ^39And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.

   ^40All these were the children of Asher, heads of their father's house,
   choice and mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the number
   throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to the war and to battle
   was twenty and six thousand men.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 8

   Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah
   the third,

   ^2Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

   ^3And the sons of Bela were, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,

   ^4And Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,

   ^5And Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.

   ^6And these are the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of the fathers of
   the inhabitants of Geba, and they removed them to Manahath:

   ^7And Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uzza, and
   Ahihud.

   ^8And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had
   sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.

   ^9And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and
   Malcham,

   ^10And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the
   fathers.

   ^11And of Hushim he begat Abitub, and Elpaal.

   ^12The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono, and
   Lod, with the towns thereof:

   ^13Beriah also, and Shema, who were heads of the fathers of the
   inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath:

   ^14And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,

   ^15And Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader,

   ^16And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah;

   ^17And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and Heber,

   ^18Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;

   ^19And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,

   ^20And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel,

   ^21And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;

   ^22And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel,

   ^23And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,

   ^24And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah,

   ^25And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak;

   ^26And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,

   ^27And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.

   ^28These were heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief men.
   These dwelt in Jerusalem.

   ^29And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; whose wife's name was
   Maachah:

   ^30And his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,

   ^31And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher.

   ^32And Mikloth begat Shimeah. And these also dwelt with their brethren
   in Jerusalem, over against them.

   ^33And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan,
   and Malchi- shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal.

   ^34And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begat Micah.

   ^35And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.

   ^36And Ahaz begat Jehoadah; and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth,
   and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza,

   ^37And Moza begat Binea: Rapha was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his
   son:

   ^38And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and
   Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons
   of Azel.

   ^39And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush
   the second, and Eliphelet the third.

   ^40And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers, and had
   many sons, and sons' sons, an hundred and fifty. All these are of the
   sons of Benjamin.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 9

   So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were
   written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah, who were carried
   away to Babylon for their transgression.

   ^2Now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in their
   cities were, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims.

   ^3And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children
   of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh;

   ^4Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son
   of Bani, of the children of Pharez the son of Judah.

   ^5And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.

   ^6And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and
   ninety.

   ^7And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of
   Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah,

   ^8And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of
   Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son
   of Ibnijah;

   ^9And their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and
   fifty and six. All these men were chief of the fathers in the house of
   their fathers.

   ^10And of the priests; Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin,

   ^11And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of
   Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house
   of God;

   ^12And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of
   Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son
   of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;

   ^13And their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand
   and seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the
   service of the house of God.

   ^14And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam,
   the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;

   ^15And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah,
   the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;

   ^16And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of
   Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that dwelt
   in the villages of the Netophathites.

   ^17And the porters were, Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman,
   and their brethren: Shallum was the chief;

   ^18Who hitherto waited in the king's gate eastward: they were porters
   in the companies of the children of Levi.

   ^19And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
   and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, were over
   the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle: and
   their fathers, being over the host of the Lord, were keepers of the
   entry.

   ^20And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time
   past, and the Lord was with him.

   ^21And Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the
   tabernacle of the congregation.

   ^22All these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two
   hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their
   villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set
   office.

   ^23So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the
   house of the Lord, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.

   ^24In four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and
   south.

   ^25And their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come after
   seven days from time to time with them.

   ^26For these Levites, the four chief porters, were in their set office,
   and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of God.

   ^27And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge was
   upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to them.

   ^28And certain of them had the charge of the ministering vessels, that
   they should bring them in and out by tale.

   ^29Some of them also were appointed to oversee the vessels, and all the
   instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine, and the
   oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.

   ^30And some of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the spices.

   ^31And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum
   the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were made in the
   pans.

   ^32And other of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were
   over the shewbread, to prepare it every sabbath.

   ^33And these are the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites, who
   remaining in the chambers were free: for they were employed in that
   work day and night.

   ^34These chief fathers of the Levites were chief throughout their
   generations; these dwelt at Jerusalem.

   ^35And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife's name
   was Maachah:

   ^36And his firstborn son Abdon, then Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner,
   and Nadab,

   ^37And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.

   ^38And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren
   at Jerusalem, over against their brethren.

   ^39And Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat Saul; and Saul begat Jonathan,
   and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal.

   ^40And the son of Jonathan was Merib- baal: and Merib-baal begat Micah.

   ^41And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and
   Ahaz.

   ^42And Ahaz begat Jarah; and Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and
   Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza;

   ^43And Moza begat Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel
   his son.

   ^44And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and
   Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these were the sons of
   Azel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 10

   Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled
   from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.

   ^2And the Philistines followed hard after Saul, and after his sons; and
   the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons
   of Saul.

   ^3And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him, and
   he was wounded of the archers.

   ^4Then said Saul to his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me
   through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his
   armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. So Saul took a sword,
   and fell upon it.

   ^5And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise on
   the sword, and died.

   ^6So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died together.

   ^7And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that they
   fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, then they forsook their
   cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.

   ^8And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip
   the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa.

   ^9And when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his armour,
   and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry tidings
   unto their idols, and to the people.

   ^10And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened his
   head in the temple of Dagon.

   ^11And when all Jabeshgilead heard all that the Philistines had done to
   Saul,

   ^12They arose, all the valiant men, and took away the body of Saul, and
   the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their
   bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

   ^13So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the
   Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not, and also
   for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it;

   ^14And enquired not of the Lord: therefore he slew him, and turned the
   kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 11

   Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying,
   Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

   ^2And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that
   leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord thy God said unto
   thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my
   people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel.

   ^3Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron; and
   David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord; and they
   anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the Lord by
   Samuel.

   ^4And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus; where the
   Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.

   ^5And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come
   hither. Nevertheless David took the castle of Zion, which is the city
   of David.

   ^6And David said, Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be chief
   and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.

   ^7And David dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city of
   David.

   ^8And he built the city round about, even from Millo round about: and
   Joab repaired the rest of the city.

   ^9So David waxed greater and greater: for the Lord of hosts was with
   him.

   ^10These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who
   strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all Israel,
   to make him king, according to the word of the Lord concerning Israel.

   ^11And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had; Jashobeam,
   and Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his spear
   against three hundred slain by him at one time.

   ^12And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one
   of the three mighties.

   ^13He was with David at Pas-dammim, and there the Philistines were
   gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of
   barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.

   ^14And they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and delivered
   it, and slew the Philistines; and the Lord saved them by a great
   deliverance.

   ^15Now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David,
   into the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines encamped in
   the valley of Rephaim.

   ^16And David was then in the hold, and the Philistines' garrison was
   then at Bethlehem.

   ^17And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the
   water of the well of Bethlehem, that is at the gate!

   ^18And the three brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew
   water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it,
   and brought it to David: but David would not drink of it, but poured it
   out to the Lord,

   ^19And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing: shall I
   drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for
   with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would
   not drink it. These things did these three mightiest.

   ^20And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three: for
   lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a
   name among the three.

   ^21Of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was their
   captain: howbeit he attained not to the first three.

   ^22Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel,
   who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab: also he went
   down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.

   ^23And he slew an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high;
   and in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and he
   went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the
   Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.

   ^24These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among
   the three mighties.

   ^25Behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to the
   first three: and David set him over his guard.

   ^26Also the valiant men of the armies were, Asahel the brother of Joab,
   Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,

   ^27Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,

   ^28Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Antothite,

   ^29Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,

   ^30Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,

   ^31Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, that pertained to the children of
   Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,

   ^32Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,

   ^33Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,

   ^34The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the
   Hararite,

   ^35Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,

   ^36Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,

   ^37Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,

   ^38Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haggeri,

   ^39Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab
   the son of Zeruiah,

   ^40Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,

   ^41Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,

   ^42Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites,
   and thirty with him,

   ^43Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,

   ^44Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the
   Aroerite,

   ^45Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,

   ^46Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam,
   and Ithmah the Moabite,

   ^47Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 12

   Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept
   himself close because of Saul the son of Kish: and they were among the
   mighty men, helpers of the war.

   ^2They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the
   left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of Saul's
   brethren of Benjamin.

   ^3The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the
   Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah,
   and Jehu the Antothite,

   ^4And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over
   the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the
   Gederathite,

   ^5Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the
   Haruphite,

   ^6Elkanah, and Jesiah, and PrAzareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the
   Korhites,

   ^7And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

   ^8And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the
   hold to the wilderness men of might, and men of war fit for the battle,
   that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like the faces
   of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains;

   ^9Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,

   ^10Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,

   ^11Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,

   ^12Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,

   ^13Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh.

   ^14These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the
   least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.

   ^15These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it had
   overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all them of the
   valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.

   ^16And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold
   unto David.

   ^17And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them, If
   ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be knit unto
   you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no
   wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke
   it.

   ^18Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and
   he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse:
   peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God
   helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them captains of the
   band.

   ^19And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the
   Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the
   lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He will
   fall to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.

   ^20As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and
   Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai,
   captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.

   ^21And they helped David against the band of the rovers: for they were
   all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.

   ^22For at that time day by day there came to David to help him, until
   it was a great host, like the host of God.

   ^23And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the
   war, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him,
   according to the word of the Lord.

   ^24The children of Judah that bare shield and spear were six thousand
   and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.

   ^25Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war, seven
   thousand and one hundred.

   ^26Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred.

   ^27And Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites, and with him were
   three thousand and seven hundred;

   ^28And Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, and of his father's house
   twenty and two captains.

   ^29And of the children of Benjamin, the kindred of Saul, three
   thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of
   the house of Saul.

   ^30And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred,
   mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their fathers.

   ^31And of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, which were
   expressed by name, to come and make David king.

   ^32And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
   understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads
   of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their
   commandment.

   ^33Of Zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with all
   instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could keep rank: they were
   not of double heart.

   ^34And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield and
   spear thirty and seven thousand.

   ^35And of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and six
   hundred.

   ^36And of Asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty
   thousand.

   ^37And on the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites,
   and of the half tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of
   war for the battle, an hundred and twenty thousand.

   ^38All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect
   heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest
   also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.

   ^39And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking: for
   their brethren had prepared for them.

   ^40Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Issachar and Zebulun
   and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and
   on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and
   wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there was joy in
   Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 13

   And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, and
   with every leader.

   ^2And David said unto all the congregation of Israel, If it seem good
   unto you, and that it be of the Lord our God, let us send abroad unto
   our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of Israel, and
   with them also to the priests and Levites which are in their cities and
   suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:

   ^3And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we enquired not
   at it in the days of Saul.

   ^4And all the congregation said that they would do so: for the thing
   was right in the eyes of all the people.

   ^5So David gathered all Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even unto
   the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjathjearim.

   ^6And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, that is, to Kirjath-
   jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God the
   Lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is called on it.

   ^7And they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of
   Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart.

   ^8And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, and
   with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels,
   and with cymbals, and with trumpets.

   ^9And when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon, Uzza put forth
   his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.

   ^10And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzza, and he smote
   him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God.

   ^11And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon
   Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perez-uzza to this day.

   ^12And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the
   ark of God home to me?

   ^13So David brought not the ark home to himself to the city of David,
   but carried it aside into the house of Obededom the Gittite.

   ^14And the ark of God remained with the family of Obededom in his house
   three months. And the Lord blessed the house of Obededom, and all that
   he had.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 14

   Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of cedars,
   with masons and carpenters, to build him an house.

   ^2And David perceived that the Lord had confirmed him king over Israel,
   for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people Israel.

   ^3And David took more wives at Jerusalem: and David begat more sons and
   daughters.

   ^4Now these are the names of his children which he had in Jerusalem;
   Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,

   ^5And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet,

   ^6And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,

   ^7And Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.

   ^8And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all
   Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of
   it, and went out against them.

   ^9And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of
   Rephaim.

   ^10And David enquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the
   Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the Lord
   said unto him, Go up; for I will deliver them into thine hand.

   ^11So they came up to Baalperazim; and David smote them there. Then
   David said, God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the
   breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place
   Baalperazim.

   ^12And when they had left their gods there, David gave a commandment,
   and they were burned with fire.

   ^13And the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the
   valley.

   ^14Therefore David enquired again of God; and God said unto him, Go not
   up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over against the
   mulberry trees.

   ^15And it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the tops
   of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for God
   is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the Philistines.

   ^16David therefore did as God commanded him: and they smote the host of
   the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer.

   ^17And the fame of David went out into all lands; and the Lord brought
   the fear of him upon all nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 15

   And David made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place
   for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.

   ^2Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites:
   for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister
   unto him for ever.

   ^3And David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the
   ark of the Lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it.

   ^4And David assembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites:

   ^5Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
   and twenty:

   ^6Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred
   and twenty:

   ^7Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the chief, and his brethren an hundred
   and thirty:

   ^8Of the sons of Elizaphan; Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two
   hundred:

   ^9Of the sons of Hebron; Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore:

   ^10Of the sons of Uzziel; Amminadab the chief, and his brethren an
   hundred and twelve.

   ^11And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the
   Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and
   Amminadab,

   ^12And said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers of the Levites:
   sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up
   the ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared
   for it.

   ^13For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made a
   breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.

   ^14So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the
   ark of the Lord God of Israel.

   ^15And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their
   shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the
   word of the Lord.

   ^16And David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their
   brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and
   harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.

   ^17So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren,
   Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren,
   Ethan the son of Kushaiah;

   ^18And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben,
   and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah,
   and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and
   Obededom, and Jeiel, the porters.

   ^19So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were appointed to sound
   with cymbals of brass;

   ^20And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and
   Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth;

   ^21And Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and
   Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to excel.

   ^22And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was for song: he instructed
   about the song, because he was skilful.

   ^23And Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.

   ^24And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and
   Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the
   trumpets before the ark of God: and Obededom and Jehiah were
   doorkeepers for the ark.

   ^25So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands,
   went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the house
   of Obededom with joy.

   ^26And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bare the ark
   of the covenant of the Lord, that they offered seven bullocks and seven
   rams.

   ^27And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites
   that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the
   song with the singers: David also had upon him an ephod of linen.

   ^28Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with
   shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with
   cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.

   ^29And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the Lord came to
   the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looking out at a
   window saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her
   heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 16

   So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent
   that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices and
   peace offerings before God.

   ^2And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings and
   the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord.

   ^3And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one
   a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine.

   ^4And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of
   the Lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the Lord God of
   Israel:

   ^5Asaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth,
   and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obededom: and
   Jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but Asaph made a sound with
   cymbals;

   ^6Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually
   before the ark of the covenant of God.

   ^7Then on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the Lord
   into the hand of Asaph and his brethren.

   ^8Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his deeds
   among the people.

   ^9Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous
   works.

   ^10Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek
   the Lord.

   ^11Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually.

   ^12Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders, and
   the judgments of his mouth;

   ^13O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob, his chosen
   ones.

   ^14He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.

   ^15Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he commanded to
   a thousand generations;

   ^16Even of the covenant which he made with Abraham, and of his oath
   unto Isaac;

   ^17And hath confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
   everlasting covenant,

   ^18Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
   inheritance;

   ^19When ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it.

   ^20And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to
   another people;

   ^21He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for
   their sakes,

   ^22Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

   ^23Sing unto the Lord, all the earth; shew forth from day to day his
   salvation.

   ^24Declare his glory among the heathen; his marvellous works among all
   nations.

   ^25For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be
   feared above all gods.

   ^26For all the gods of the people are idols: but the Lord made the
   heavens.

   ^27Glory and honour are in his presence; strength and gladness are in
   his place.

   ^28Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord
   glory and strength.

   ^29Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering,
   and come before him: worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.

   ^30Fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable, that
   it be not moved.

   ^31Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men say
   among the nations, The Lord reigneth.

   ^32Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields rejoice,
   and all that is therein.

   ^33Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the
   Lord, because he cometh to judge the earth.

   ^34O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good; for his mercy endureth
   for ever.

   ^35And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together,
   and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy
   name, and glory in thy praise.

   ^36Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever. And all the
   people said, Amen, and praised the Lord.

   ^37So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the Lord Asaph
   and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as every
   day's work required:

   ^38And Obed- edom with their brethren, threescore and eight; Obededom
   also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be porters:

   ^39And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the
   tabernacle of the Lord in the high place that was at Gibeon,

   ^40To offer burnt offerings unto the Lord upon the altar of the burnt
   offering continually morning and evening, and to do according to all
   that is written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded Israel;

   ^41And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who
   were expressed by name, to give thanks to the Lord, because his mercy
   endureth for ever;

   ^42And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those
   that should make a sound, and with musical instruments of God. And the
   sons of Jeduthun were porters.

   ^43And all the people departed every man to his house: and David
   returned to bless his house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 17

   Now it came to pass, as David sat in his house, that David said to
   Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark of
   the covenant of the Lord remaineth under curtains.

   ^2Then Nathan said unto David, Do all that is in thine heart; for God
   is with thee.

   ^3And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to
   Nathan, saying,

   ^4Go and tell David my servant, Thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not
   build me an house to dwell in:

   ^5For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up
   Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one
   tabernacle to another.

   ^6Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spake I a word to any of
   the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying, Why
   have ye not built me an house of cedars?

   ^7Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith
   the Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, even from following
   the sheep, that thou shouldest be ruler over my people Israel:

   ^8And I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and have
   cut off all thine enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name
   like the name of the great men that are in the earth.

   ^9Also I will ordain a place for my people Israel, and will plant them,
   and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more;
   neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at the
   beginning,

   ^10And since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people
   Israel. Moreover I will subdue all thine enemies. Furthermore I tell
   thee that the Lord will build thee an house.

   ^11And it shall come to pass, when thy days be expired that thou must
   go to be with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee,
   which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.

   ^12He shall build me an house, and I will stablish his throne for ever.

   ^13I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and I will not take my
   mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was before thee:

   ^14But I will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for ever: and
   his throne shall be established for evermore.

   ^15According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so
   did Nathan speak unto David.

   ^16And David the king came and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I,
   O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?

   ^17And yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God; for thou hast
   also spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to come, and hast
   regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Lord
   God.

   ^18What can David speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant? for
   thou knowest thy servant.

   ^19O Lord, for thy servant's sake, and according to thine own heart,
   hast thou done all this greatness, in making known all these great
   things.

   ^20O Lord, there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside
   thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

   ^21And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God
   went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of greatness
   and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people, whom
   thou hast redeemed out of Egypt?

   ^22For thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and
   thou, Lord, becamest their God.

   ^23Therefore now, Lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken concerning
   thy servant and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as
   thou hast said.

   ^24Let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for ever,
   saying, The Lord of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel:
   and let the house of David thy servant be established before thee.

   ^25For thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build him
   an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray before
   thee.

   ^26And now, Lord, thou art God, and hast promised this goodness unto
   thy servant:

   ^27Now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant,
   that it may be before thee for ever: for thou blessest, O Lord, and it
   shall be blessed for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 18

   Now after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and
   subdued them, and took Gath and her towns out of the hand of the
   Philistines.

   ^2And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became David's servants, and
   brought gifts.

   ^3And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went to
   stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates.

   ^4And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand
   horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: David also houghed all the
   chariot horses, but reserved of them an hundred chariots.

   ^5And when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of
   Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.

   ^6Then David put garrisons in Syria-damascus; and the Syrians became
   David's servants, and brought gifts. Thus the Lord preserved David
   whithersoever he went.

   ^7And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of
   Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

   ^8Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought
   David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the
   pillars, and the vessels of brass.

   ^9Now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smitten all the host
   of Hadarezer king of Zobah;

   ^10He sent Hadoram his son to king David, to enquire of his welfare,
   and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and
   smitten him; (for Hadarezer had war with Tou;) and with him all manner
   of vessels of gold and silver and brass.

   ^11Them also king David dedicated unto the Lord, with the silver and
   the gold that he brought from all these nations; from Edom, and from
   Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and
   from Amalek.

   ^12Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in the
   valley of salt eighteen thousand.

   ^13And he put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became David's
   servants. Thus the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.

   ^14So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and justice
   among all his people.

   ^15And Joab the son Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son
   of Ahilud, recorder.

   ^16And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were
   the priests; and Shavsha was scribe;

   ^17And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the
   Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief about the king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 19

   Now it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the children of
   Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.

   ^2And David said, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash,
   because his father shewed kindness to me. And David sent messengers to
   comfort him concerning his father. So the servants of David came into
   the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.

   ^3But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Thinkest thou
   that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto
   thee? are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to
   overthrow, and to spy out the land?

   ^4Wherefore Hanun took David's servants, and shaved them, and cut off
   their garments in the midst hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.

   ^5Then there went certain, and told David how the men were served. And
   he sent to meet them: for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king
   said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.

   ^6And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves
   odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand
   talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of
   Mesopotamia, and out of Syria-maachah, and out of Zobah.

   ^7So they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of
   Maachah and his people; who came and pitched before Medeba. And the
   children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and
   came to battle.

   ^8And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the
   mighty men.

   ^9And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array
   before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come were by
   themselves in the field.

   ^10Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and
   behind, he chose out of all the choice of Israel, and put them in array
   against the Syrians.

   ^11And the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of Abishai his
   brother, and they set themselves in array against the children of
   Ammon.

   ^12And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt
   help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I
   will help thee.

   ^13Be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for our
   people, and for the cities of our God: and let the Lord do that which
   is good in his sight.

   ^14So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the
   Syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.

   ^15And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, they
   likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city.
   Then Joab came to Jerusalem.

   ^16And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before
   Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were
   beyond the river: and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer
   went before them.

   ^17And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and passed over
   Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against them.
   So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they
   fought with him.

   ^18But the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians
   seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty thousand
   footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host.

   ^19And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the
   worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and became his
   servants: neither would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any
   more.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 20

   And it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time that
   kings go out to battle, Joab led forth the power of the army, and
   wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged
   Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and
   destroyed it.

   ^2And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found
   it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and
   it was set upon David's head: and he brought also exceeding much spoil
   out of the city.

   ^3And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with
   saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. Even so dealt David with
   all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people
   returned to Jerusalem.

   ^4And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with
   the Philistines; at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Sippai,
   that was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.

   ^5And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of
   Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear staff
   was like a weaver's beam.

   ^6And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of great
   stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each hand,
   and six on each foot: and he also was the son of the giant.

   ^7But when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother
   slew him.

   ^8These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of
   David, and by the hand of his servants.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 21

   And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.

   ^2And David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go, number
   Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me,
   that I may know it.

   ^3And Joab answered, The Lord make his people an hundred times so many
   more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's
   servants? why then doth my lord require this thing? why will he be a
   cause of trespass to Israel?

   ^4Nevertheless the king's word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab
   departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.

   ^5And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And all
   they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand men
   that drew sword: and Judah was four hundred threescore and ten thousand
   men that drew sword.

   ^6But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the king's word
   was abominable to Joab.

   ^7And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote Israel.

   ^8And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done
   this thing: but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy
   servant; for I have done very foolishly.

   ^9And the Lord spake unto Gad, David's seer, saying,

   ^10Go and tell David, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three
   things: choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.

   ^11So Gad came to David, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Choose
   thee

   ^12Either three years' famine; or three months to be destroyed before
   thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thee; or
   else three days the sword of the Lord, even the pestilence, in the
   land, and the angel of the Lord destroying throughout all the coasts of
   Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what word I shall bring again to
   him that sent me.

   ^13And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall now
   into the hand of the Lord; for very great are his mercies: but let me
   not fall into the hand of man.

   ^14So the Lord sent pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of Israel
   seventy thousand men.

   ^15And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was
   destroying, the Lord beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said
   to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand. And the
   angel of the Lord stood by the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.

   ^16And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the Lord stand
   between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand
   stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders of Israel, who
   were clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.

   ^17And David said unto God, Is it not I that commanded the people to be
   numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed; but as
   for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, O
   Lord my God, be on me, and on my father's house; but not on thy people,
   that they should be plagued.

   ^18Then the angel of the Lord commanded Gad to say to David, that David
   should go up, and set up an altar unto the Lord in the threshingfloor
   of Ornan the Jebusite.

   ^19And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spake in the name
   of the Lord.

   ^20And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with him
   hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.

   ^21And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out
   of the threshingfloor, and bowed himself to David with his face to the
   ground.

   ^22Then David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of this threshingfloor,
   that I may build an altar therein unto the Lord: thou shalt grant it me
   for the full price: that the plague may be stayed from the people.

   ^23And Ornan said unto David, Take it to thee, and let my lord the king
   do that which is good in his eyes: lo,I give thee the oxen also for
   burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat
   for the meat offering; I give it all.

   ^24And king David said to Ornan, Nay; but I will verily buy it for the
   full price: for I will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor
   offer burnt offerings without cost.

   ^25So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by
   weight.

   ^26And David built there an altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt
   offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the Lord; and he
   answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.

   ^27And the Lord commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again into
   the sheath thereof.

   ^28At that time when David saw that the Lord had answered him in the
   threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.

   ^29For the tabernacle of the Lord, which Moses made in the wilderness,
   and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season in the high
   place at Gibeon.

   ^30But David could not go before it to enquire of God: for he was
   afraid because of the sword of the angel of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 22

   Then David said, This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the
   altar of the burnt offering for Israel.

   ^2And David commanded to gather together the strangers that were in the
   land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the
   house of God.

   ^3And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of
   the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without weight;

   ^4Also cedar trees in abundance: for the Zidonians and they of Tyre
   brought much cedar wood to David.

   ^5And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house
   that is to be builded for the Lord must be exceeding magnifical, of
   fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will therefore now make
   preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.

   ^6Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build an house
   for the Lord God of Israel.

   ^7And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it was in my mind to
   build an house unto the name of the Lord my God:

   ^8But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood
   abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house
   unto my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my
   sight.

   ^9Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and
   I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name
   shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in
   his days.

   ^10He shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I
   will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over
   Israel for ever.

   ^11Now, my son, the Lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build the
   house of the Lord thy God, as he hath said of thee.

   ^12Only the Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee
   charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the Lord thy
   God.

   ^13Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes
   and judgments which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel: be
   strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.

   ^14Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the Lord
   an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of
   silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in abundance:
   timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add thereto.

   ^15Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and
   workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every
   manner of work.

   ^16Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no
   number. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

   ^17David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his
   son, saying,

   ^18Is not the Lord your God with you? and hath he not given you rest on
   every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of the land into mine
   hand; and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people.

   ^19Now set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God; arise
   therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the Lord God, to bring the ark
   of the covenant of the Lord, and the holy vessels of God, into the
   house that is to be built to the name of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 23

   So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king
   over Israel.

   ^2And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests
   and the Levites.

   ^3Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and
   upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and
   eight thousand.

   ^4Of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work of
   the house of the Lord; and six thousand were officers and judges:

   ^5Moreover four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised the
   Lord with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise
   therewith.

   ^6And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi, namely,
   Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

   ^7Of the Gershonites were, Laadan, and Shimei.

   ^8The sons of Laadan; the chief was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel,
   three.

   ^9The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These
   were the chief of the fathers of Laadan.

   ^10And the sons of Shimei were, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah.
   These four were the sons of Shimei.

   ^11And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and Beriah
   had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning, according to
   their father's house.

   ^12The sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.

   ^13The sons of Amram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was separated, that he
   should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for ever, to burn
   incense before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name
   for ever.

   ^14Now concerning Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the
   tribe of Levi.

   ^15The sons of Moses were, Gershom, and Eliezer.

   ^16Of the sons of Gershom, Shebuel was the chief.

   ^17And the sons of Eliezer were, Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had
   none other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.

   ^18Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith the chief.

   ^19Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second,
   Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.

   ^20Of the sons of Uzziel; Micah the first, and Jesiah the second.

   ^21The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli; Eleazar,
   and Kish.

   ^22And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their brethren
   the sons of Kish took them.

   ^23The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.

   ^24These were the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers; even
   the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names by
   their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the
   Lord, from the age of twenty years and upward.

   ^25For David said, The Lord God of Israel hath given rest unto his
   people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever:

   ^26And also unto the Levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle,
   nor any vessels of it for the service thereof.

   ^27For by the last words of David the Levites were numbered from twenty
   years old and above:

   ^28Because their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the
   service of the house of the Lord, in the courts, and in the chambers,
   and in the purifying of all holy things, and the work of the service of
   the house of God;

   ^29Both for the shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering,
   and for the unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan,
   and for that which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size;

   ^30And to stand every morning to thank and praise the Lord, and
   likewise at even;

   ^31And to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the Lord in the sabbaths, in
   the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number, according to the order
   commanded unto them, continually before the Lord:

   ^32And that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of the
   congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the
   sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 24

   Now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron;
   Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

   ^2But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children:
   therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest's office.

   ^3And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and
   Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their offices in their
   service.

   ^4And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of
   the sons of Ithamar; and thus were they divided. Among the sons of
   Eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers, and
   eight among the sons of Ithamar according to the house of their
   fathers.

   ^5Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the
   governors of the sanctuary, and governors of the house of God, were of
   the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.

   ^6And Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe, one of the Levites,
   wrote them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and
   Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of
   the priests and Levites: one principal household being taken for
   Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.

   ^7Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,

   ^8The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,

   ^9The fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,

   ^10The seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,

   ^11The ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,

   ^12The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,

   ^13The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,

   ^14The fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,

   ^15The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses,

   ^16The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezekel,

   ^17The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,

   ^18The three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to
   Maaziah.

   ^19These were the orderings of them in their service to come into the
   house of the Lord, according to their manner, under Aaron their father,
   as the Lord God of Israel had commanded him.

   ^20And the rest of the sons of Levi were these: Of the sons of Amram;
   Shubael: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah.

   ^21Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, the first was Isshiah.

   ^22Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath.

   ^23And the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second,
   Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.

   ^24Of the sons of Uzziel; Michah: of the sons of Michah; Shamir.

   ^25The brother of Michah was Isshiah: of the sons of Isshiah;
   Zechariah.

   ^26The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi: the sons of Jaaziah; Beno.

   ^27The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and
   Ibri.

   ^28Of Mahli came Eleazar, who had no sons.

   ^29Concerning Kish: the son of Kish was Jerahmeel.

   ^30The sons also of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were
   the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers.

   ^31These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of
   Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and
   the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the principal
   fathers over against their younger brethren.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 25

   Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the service of
   the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy
   with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of the
   workmen according to their service was:

   ^2Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and
   Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied
   according to the order of the king.

   ^3Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah,
   Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father
   Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to praise the
   Lord.

   ^4Of Heman: the sons of Heman; Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and
   Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer,
   Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth:

   ^5All these were the sons of Heman the king's seer in the words of God,
   to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three
   daughters.

   ^6All these were under the hands of their father for song in the house
   of the Lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of
   the house of God, according to the king's order to Asaph, Jeduthun, and
   Heman.

   ^7So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in
   the songs of the Lord, even all that were cunning, was two hundred
   fourscore and eight.

   ^8And they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the
   great, the teacher as the scholar.

   ^9Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to
   Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve:

   ^10The third to Zaccur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^11The fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^12The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^13The sixth to Bukkiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^14The seventh to Jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^15The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^16The ninth to Mattaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^17The tenth to Shimei, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:

   ^18The eleventh to PrAzareel, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^19The twelfth to Hashabiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^20The thirteenth to Shubael, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^21The fourteenth to Mattithiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^22The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^23The sixteenth to Hananiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^24The seventeenth to Joshbekashah, he, his sons, and his brethren,
   were twelve:

   ^25The eighteenth to Hanani, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^26The nineteenth to Mallothi, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^27The twentieth to Eliathah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were
   twelve:

   ^28The one and twentieth to Hothir, he, his sons, and his brethren,
   were twelve:

   ^29The two and twentieth to Giddalti, he, his sons, and his brethren,
   were twelve:

   ^30The three and twentieth to Mahazioth, he, his sons, and his
   brethren, were twelve:

   ^31The four and twentieth to Romamti-ezer, he, his sons, and his
   brethren, were twelve.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 26

   Concerning the divisions of the porters: Of the Korhites was
   Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.

   ^2And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael
   the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,

   ^3Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.

   ^4Moreover the sons of Obededom were, Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad
   the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the
   fifth,

   ^5Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God
   blessed him.

   ^6Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout the
   house of their father: for they were mighty men of valour.

   ^7The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose
   brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.

   ^8All these of the sons of Obededom: they and their sons and their
   brethren, able men for strength for the service, were threescore and
   two of Obededom.

   ^9And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eighteen.

   ^10Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief,
   (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the
   chief;)

   ^11Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all
   the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.

   ^12Among these were the divisions of the porters, even among the chief
   men, having wards one against another, to minister in the house of the
   Lord.

   ^13And they cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to the
   house of their fathers, for every gate.

   ^14And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son,
   a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.

   ^15To Obed- edom southward; and to his sons the house of Asuppim.

   ^16To Shuppim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate
   Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward.

   ^17Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a
   day, and toward Asuppim two and two.

   ^18At Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at Parbar.

   ^19These are the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore, and
   among the sons of Merari.

   ^20And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of
   God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.

   ^21As concerning the sons of Laadan; the sons of the Gershonite Laadan,
   chief fathers, even of Laadan the Gershonite, were Jehieli.

   ^22The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, and Joel his brother, which were over
   the treasures of the house of the Lord.

   ^23Of the Amramites, and the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the
   Uzzielites:

   ^24And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler of the
   treasures.

   ^25And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son,
   and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.

   ^26Which Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of the
   dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the
   captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had
   dedicated.

   ^27Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain the
   house of the Lord.

   ^28And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner
   the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; and
   whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith,
   and of his brethren.

   ^29Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward
   business over Israel, for officers and judges.

   ^30And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a
   thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of Israel on this
   side Jordan westward in all the business of the Lord, and in the
   service of the king.

   ^31Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the
   Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the
   fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there
   were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.

   ^32And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven hundred
   chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites, the
   Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to
   God, and affairs of the king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 27

   Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the chief
   fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers that
   served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and went
   out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of every
   course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^2Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son of
   Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^3Of the children of Perez was the chief of all the captains of the
   host for the first month.

   ^4And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and of
   his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were
   twenty and four thousand.

   ^5The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the son
   of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and four
   thousand.

   ^6This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above the
   thirty: and in his course was Ammizabad his son.

   ^7The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of
   Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty and
   four thousand.

   ^8The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and
   in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^9The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the
   Tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^10The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of
   the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty and four
   thousand.

   ^11The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite,
   of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^12The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anetothite, of
   the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^13The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite,
   of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.

   ^14The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the
   Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty
   and four thousand.

   ^15The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the
   Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty and four
   thousand.

   ^16Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites
   was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of
   Maachah:

   ^17Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel: of the Aaronites,
   Zadok:

   ^18Of Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of David: of Issachar, Omri the
   son of Michael:

   ^19Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the
   son of Azriel:

   ^20Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the half
   tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah:

   ^21Of the half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah:
   of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner:

   ^22Of Dan, PrAzareel the son of Jeroham. These were the princes of the
   tribes of Israel.

   ^23But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and
   under: because the Lord had said he would increase Israel like to the
   stars of the heavens.

   ^24Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not,
   because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number
   put in the account of the chronicles of king David.

   ^25And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and
   over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages,
   and in the castles, was Jehonathan the son of Uzziah:

   ^26And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the
   ground was Ezri the son of Chelub:

   ^27And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase
   of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite:

   ^28And over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that were in the low
   plains was Baalhanan the Gederite: and over the cellars of oil was
   Joash:

   ^29And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and
   over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai:

   ^30Over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was
   Jehdeiah the Meronothite:

   ^31And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All these were the
   rulers of the substance which was king David's.

   ^32Also Jonathan David's uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a
   scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons:

   ^33And Ahithophel was the king's counsellor: and Hushai the Archite was
   the king's companion:

   ^34And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar:
   and the general of the king's army was Joab.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 28

   And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the
   tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king
   by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the
   hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of the
   king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men, and
   with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem.

   ^2Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my
   brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an
   house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and for the
   footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building:

   ^3But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name,
   because thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.

   ^4Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my
   father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to be
   the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among
   the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all Israel:

   ^5And of all my sons, (for the Lord hath given me many sons,) he hath
   chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord
   over Israel.

   ^6And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my
   courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.

   ^7Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to
   do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.

   ^8Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the
   Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
   commandments of the Lord your God: that ye may possess this good land,
   and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.

   ^9And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve
   him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord
   searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the
   thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
   forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

   ^10Take heed now; for the Lord hath chosen thee to build an house for
   the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.

   ^11Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of
   the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper
   chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place
   of the mercy seat,

   ^12And the pattern of all that he had by the spirit, of the courts of
   the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about, of the
   treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the dedicated
   things:

   ^13Also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the
   work of the service of the house of the Lord, and for all the vessels
   of service in the house of the Lord.

   ^14He gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for all instruments of
   all manner of service; silver also for all instruments of silver by
   weight, for all instruments of every kind of service:

   ^15Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their lamps of
   gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps thereof: and
   for the candlesticks of silver by weight, both for the candlestick, and
   also for the lamps thereof, according to the use of every candlestick.

   ^16And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, for every
   table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver:

   ^17Also pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and
   for the golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and
   likewise silver by weight for every bason of silver:

   ^18And for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for
   the pattern of the chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their
   wings, and covered the ark of the covenant of the Lord.

   ^19All this, said David, the Lord made me understand in writing by his
   hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

   ^20And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage,
   and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the Lord God, even my God,
   will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou
   hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord.

   ^21And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, even they
   shall be with thee for all the service of the house of God: and there
   shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing skilful
   man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the people
   will be wholly at thy commandment.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 29

   Furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation, Solomon my
   son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work
   is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the Lord God.

   ^2Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the
   gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of
   silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of iron,
   and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set,
   glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious
   stones, and marble stones in abundance.

   ^3Moreover, because I have set my affection to the house of my God, I
   have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which I have given to
   the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the
   holy house,

   ^4Even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven
   thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses
   withal:

   ^5The gold for things of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and
   for all manner of work to be made by the hands of artificers. And who
   then is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the Lord?

   ^6Then the chief of the fathers and princes of the tribes of Israel,
   and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers of the
   king's work, offered willingly,

   ^7And gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand
   talents and ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and
   of brass eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of
   iron.

   ^8And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the
   treasure of the house of the Lord, by the hand of Jehiel the
   Gershonite.

   ^9Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because
   with perfect heart they offered willingly to the Lord: and David the
   king also rejoiced with great joy.

   ^10Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and
   David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel our father, for ever
   and ever.

   ^11Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and
   the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the
   earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as
   head above all.

   ^12Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and
   in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make
   great, and to give strength unto all.

   ^13Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.

   ^14But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer
   so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine
   own have we given thee.

   ^15For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all our
   fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
   abiding.

   ^16O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee
   an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all thine
   own.

   ^17I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure
   in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have
   willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy thy
   people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.

   ^18O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this
   for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people,
   and prepare their heart unto thee:

   ^19And give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy
   commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all these
   things, and to build the palace, for the which I have made provision.

   ^20And David said to all the congregation, Now bless the Lord your God.
   And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and
   bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king.

   ^21And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and offered burnt
   offerings unto the Lord, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand
   bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink
   offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel:

   ^22And did eat and drink before the Lord on that day with great
   gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time,
   and anointed him unto the Lord to be the chief governor, and Zadok to
   be priest.

   ^23Then Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king instead of David
   his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.

   ^24And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise
   of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.

   ^25And the Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all
   Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any
   king before him in Israel.

   ^26Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.

   ^27And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven
   years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in
   Jerusalem.

   ^28And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour: and
   Solomon his son reigned in his stead.

   ^29Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are
   written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the
   prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer,

   ^30With all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him,
   and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Second Book of the

Chronicles
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 1

   And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the
   Lord his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.

   ^2Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and
   of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel,
   the chief of the fathers.

   ^3So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place
   that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of
   God, which Moses the servant of the Lord had made in the wilderness.

   ^4But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to the
   place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it
   at Jerusalem.

   ^5Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of
   Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the Lord: and Solomon
   and the congregation sought unto it.

   ^6And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the Lord,
   which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand
   burnt offerings upon it.

   ^7In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask
   what I shall give thee.

   ^8And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my
   father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

   ^9Now, O Lord God, let thy promise unto David my father be established:
   for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in
   multitude.

   ^10Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in
   before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so
   great?

   ^11And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou
   hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine
   enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and
   knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I
   have made thee king:

   ^12Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee
   riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that
   have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the
   like.

   ^13Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at
   Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation,
   and reigned over Israel.

   ^14And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand
   and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he
   placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

   ^15And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as
   stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the
   vale for abundance.

   ^16And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the
   king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price.

   ^17And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for
   six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty:
   and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and
   for the kings of Syria, by their means.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 2

   And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the Lord, and
   an house for his kingdom.

   ^2And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens,
   and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and
   six hundred to oversee them.

   ^3And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst
   deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an
   house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.

   ^4Behold, I build an house to the name of the Lord my God, to dedicate
   it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual
   shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the
   sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the Lord
   our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.

   ^5And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above all
   gods.

   ^6But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven
   of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should build him
   an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?

   ^7Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver,
   and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and
   that can skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in Judah
   and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.

   ^8Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon:
   for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and,
   behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,

   ^9Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am
   about to build shall be wonderful great.

   ^10And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut
   timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand
   measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
   thousand baths of oil.

   ^11Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to
   Solomon, Because the Lord hath loved his people, he hath made thee king
   over them.

   ^12Huram said moreover, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that made
   heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued
   with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the
   Lord, and an house for his kingdom.

   ^13And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of
   Huram my father's,

   ^14The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man
   of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in
   stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in
   crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every
   device which shall be put to him, with thy cunning men, and with the
   cunning men of my lord David thy father.

   ^15Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine,
   which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants:

   ^16And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and
   we will bring it to thee in flotes by sea to Joppa; and thou shall
   carry it up to Jerusalem.

   ^17And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of
   Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered
   them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three
   thousand and six hundred.

   ^18And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of
   burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and three
   thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 3

   Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in mount
   Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in the place
   that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.

   ^2And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the
   fourth year of his reign.

   ^3Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the
   building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first
   measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

   ^4And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it
   was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the
   height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure
   gold.

   ^5And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid with
   fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.

   ^6And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the
   gold was gold of Parvaim.

   ^7He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls
   thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the
   walls.

   ^8And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according to
   the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty
   cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred
   talents.

   ^9And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he
   overlaid the upper chambers with gold.

   ^10And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and
   overlaid them with gold.

   ^11And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing of
   the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and
   the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the
   other cherub.

   ^12And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the
   wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to
   the wing of the other cherub.

   ^13The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits:
   and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward.

   ^14And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine
   linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.

   ^15Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits
   high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was five
   cubits.

   ^16And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads of
   the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the
   chains.

   ^17And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right
   hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the
   right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 4

   Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof,
   and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height
   thereof.

   ^2Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in
   compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty
   cubits did compass it round about.

   ^3And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round
   about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen
   were cast, when it was cast.

   ^4It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three
   looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three
   looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all
   their hinder parts were inward.

   ^5And the thickness of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it like
   the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it received
   and held three thousand baths.

   ^6He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on
   the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the burnt
   offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to wash
   in.

   ^7And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set
   them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

   ^8He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the
   right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of
   gold.

   ^9Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court,
   and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.

   ^10And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against
   the south.

   ^11And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram
   finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of
   God;

   ^12To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters which
   were on the top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the
   two pommels of the chapiters which were on the top of the pillars;

   ^13And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of
   pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters
   which were upon the pillars.

   ^14He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases;

   ^15One sea, and twelve oxen under it.

   ^16The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their
   instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of
   the Lord of bright brass.

   ^17In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground
   between Succoth and Zeredathah.

   ^18Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the
   weight of the brass could not be found out.

   ^19And Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of God, the
   golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;

   ^20Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn
   after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold;

   ^21And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and
   that perfect gold;

   ^22And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers,
   of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for
   the most holy place, and the doors of the house of the temple, were of
   gold.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 5

   Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the Lord was
   finished: and Solomon brought in all the things that David his father
   had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments,
   put he among the treasures of the house of God.

   ^2Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the
   tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto
   Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the
   city of David, which is Zion.

   ^3Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king in
   the feast which was in the seventh month.

   ^4And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark.

   ^5And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation,
   and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, these did the
   priests and the Levites bring up.

   ^6Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were
   assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which
   could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

   ^7And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto
   his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, even
   under the wings of the cherubims:

   ^8For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the ark,
   and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.

   ^9And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the staves
   were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen
   without. And there it is unto this day.

   ^10There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put
   therein at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the children of
   Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

   ^11And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy
   place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did
   not then wait by course:

   ^12Also the Levites which were the singers, all of them of Asaph, of
   Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, being arrayed
   in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the
   east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests
   sounding with trumpets:)

   ^13It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to
   make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord; and when
   they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and
   instruments of musick, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good;
   for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a
   cloud, even the house of the Lord;

   ^14So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the
   cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 6

   Then said Solomon, The Lord hath said that he would dwell in the thick
   darkness.

   ^2But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy
   dwelling for ever.

   ^3And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of
   Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.

   ^4And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath with his
   hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father David,
   saying,

   ^5Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt
   I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build an house in,
   that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over
   my people Israel:

   ^6But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have
   chosen David to be over my people Israel.

   ^7Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the
   name of the Lord God of Israel.

   ^8But the Lord said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine
   heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in
   thine heart:

   ^9Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which
   shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my
   name.

   ^10The Lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for
   I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the throne
   of Israel, as the Lord promised, and have built the house for the name
   of the Lord God of Israel.

   ^11And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the Lord,
   that he made with the children of Israel.

   ^12And he stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the
   congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands:

   ^13For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold, of five cubits long, and
   five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst
   of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees
   before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands
   toward heaven,

   ^14And said, O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in the
   heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy
   unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts:

   ^15Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which
   thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled
   it with thine hand, as it is this day.

   ^16Now therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my
   father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not fail
   thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that
   thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast
   walked before me.

   ^17Now then, O Lord God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou
   hast spoken unto thy servant David.

   ^18But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold,
   heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less
   this house which I have built!

   ^19Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his
   supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer
   which thy servant prayeth before thee:

   ^20That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the
   place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to
   hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place.

   ^21Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of thy
   people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou from
   thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.

   ^22If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to
   make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;

   ^23Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by
   requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by
   justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.

   ^24And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy,
   because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy
   name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;

   ^25Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people
   Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them
   and to their fathers.

   ^26When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have
   sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place, and confess
   thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict them;

   ^27Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and
   of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the good way, wherein
   they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given
   unto thy people for an inheritance.

   ^28If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be
   blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies besiege
   them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever
   sickness there be:

   ^29Then what prayer or what supplication soever shall be made of any
   man, or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own
   sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this house:

   ^30Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and
   render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou
   knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:)

   ^31That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live
   in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

   ^32Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel,
   but is come from a far country for thy great name's sake, and thy
   mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this
   house;

   ^33Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, and
   do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all
   people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as doth thy
   people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is
   called by thy name.

   ^34If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that
   thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which
   thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name;

   ^35Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication,
   and maintain their cause.

   ^36If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth not,)
   and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their
   enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;

   ^37Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried
   captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity,
   saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly;

   ^38If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul
   in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them
   captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their
   fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the
   house which I have built for thy name:

   ^39Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their
   prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive
   thy people which have sinned against thee.

   ^40Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine
   ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.

   ^41Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and
   the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with
   salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.

   ^42O Lord God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the
   mercies of David thy servant.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 7

   Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from
   heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the
   glory of the Lord filled the house.

   ^2And the priests could not enter into the house of the Lord, because
   the glory of the Lord had filled the Lord'S house.

   ^3And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and
   the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their
   faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the
   Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^4Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the Lord.

   ^5And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen,
   and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all the
   people dedicated the house of God.

   ^6And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with
   instruments of musick of the Lord, which David the king had made to
   praise the Lord, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David
   praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before
   them, and all Israel stood.

   ^7Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the
   house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the fat of
   the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made
   was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat offerings,
   and the fat.

   ^8Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all
   Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of
   Hamath unto the river of Egypt.

   ^9And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept the
   dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.

   ^10And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the
   people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness
   that the Lord had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his
   people.

   ^11Thus Solomon finished the house of the Lord, and the king's house:
   and all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of the
   Lord, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.

   ^12And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have
   heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of
   sacrifice.

   ^13If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the
   locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;

   ^14If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves,
   and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will
   I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their
   land.

   ^15Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer
   that is made in this place.

   ^16For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be
   there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there
   perpetually.

   ^17And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father
   walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt
   observe my statutes and my judgments;

   ^18Then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I have
   covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a
   man to be ruler in Israel.

   ^19But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments,
   which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and
   worship them;

   ^20Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have
   given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, will I
   cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a proverb and a byword
   among all nations.

   ^21And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one
   that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus
   unto this land, and unto this house?

   ^22And it shall be answered, Because they forsook the Lord God of their
   fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid
   hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore
   hath he brought all this evil upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 8

   And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had
   built the house of the Lord, and his own house,

   ^2That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built
   them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.

   ^3And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and prevailed against it.

   ^4And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities,
   which he built in Hamath.

   ^5Also he built Beth- horon the upper, and Bethhoron the nether, fenced
   cities, with walls, gates, and bars;

   ^6And Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the
   chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon
   desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the
   land of his dominion.

   ^7As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the
   Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which
   were not of Israel,

   ^8But of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the
   children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute
   until this day.

   ^9But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his
   work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains
   of his chariots and horsemen.

   ^10And these were the chief of king Solomon's officers, even two
   hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.

   ^11And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of
   David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife
   shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the
   places are holy, whereunto the ark of the Lord hath come.

   ^12Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the Lord on the altar of
   the Lord, which he had built before the porch,

   ^13Even after a certain rate every day, offering according to the
   commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the
   solemn feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened
   bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.

   ^14And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the
   courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their
   charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of
   every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate:
   for so had David the man of God commanded.

   ^15And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the
   priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.

   ^16Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the
   foundation of the house of the Lord, and until it was finished. So the
   house of the Lord was perfected.

   ^17Then went Solomon to Eziongeber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in
   the land of Edom.

   ^18And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants
   that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of
   Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty talents of
   gold, and brought them to king Solomon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 9

   And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to
   prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great
   company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and
   precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with
   him of all that was in her heart.

   ^2And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid
   from Solomon which he told her not.

   ^3And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the
   house that he had built,

   ^4And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the
   attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also,
   and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of
   the Lord; there was no more spirit in her.

   ^5And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in mine
   own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom:

   ^6Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had
   seen it: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was
   not told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard.

   ^7Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand
   continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

   ^8Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on
   his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved
   Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over
   them, to do judgment and justice.

   ^9And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of
   spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such
   spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.

   ^10And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which
   brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.

   ^11And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the
   Lord, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers:
   and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.

   ^12And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire,
   whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king.
   So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.

   ^13Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six
   hundred and threescore and six talents of gold;

   ^14Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings
   of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to
   Solomon.

   ^15And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six
   hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

   ^16And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred
   shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house
   of the forest of Lebanon.

   ^17Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with
   pure gold.

   ^18And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold,
   which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the
   sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:

   ^19And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon
   the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.

   ^20And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold, and all
   the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold:
   none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the days of
   Solomon.

   ^21For the king's ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram:
   every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and
   silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

   ^22And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and
   wisdom.

   ^23And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to
   hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.

   ^24And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and
   vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a
   rate year by year.

   ^25And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and
   twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and
   with the king at Jerusalem.

   ^26And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land
   of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

   ^27And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees
   made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.

   ^28And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all
   lands.

   ^29Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not
   written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of
   Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against
   Jeroboam the son of Nebat?

   ^30And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.

   ^31And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of
   David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 10

   And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to
   make him king.

   ^2And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in
   Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard
   it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.

   ^3And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and
   spake to Rehoboam, saying,

   ^4Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat
   the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put
   upon us, and we will serve thee.

   ^5And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And the
   people departed.

   ^6And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before
   Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye me
   to return answer to this people?

   ^7And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and
   please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants
   for ever.

   ^8But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took
   counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood
   before him.

   ^9And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer
   to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke
   that thy father did put upon us?

   ^10And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him,
   saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thee, saying,
   Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for
   us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker
   than my father's loins.

   ^11For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more to
   your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
   with scorpions.

   ^12So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as
   the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.

   ^13And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the
   counsel of the old men,

   ^14And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My
   father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father
   chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

   ^15So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God,
   that the Lord might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of
   Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

   ^16And when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto them,
   the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David?
   and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your
   tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thine own house. So all Israel
   went to their tents.

   ^17But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah,
   Rehoboam reigned over them.

   ^18Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and the
   children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king
   Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.

   ^19And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 11

   And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of
   Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which
   were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom
   again to Rehoboam.

   ^2But the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,

   ^3Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all
   Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,

   ^4Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your
   brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me.
   And they obeyed the words of the Lord, and returned from going against
   Jeroboam.

   ^5And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in
   Judah.

   ^6He built even Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,

   ^7And Bethzur, and Shoco, and Adullam,

   ^8And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,

   ^9And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,

   ^10And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in
   Benjamin fenced cities.

   ^11And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and
   store of victual, and of oil and wine.

   ^12And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made them
   exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.

   ^13And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to
   him out of all their coasts.

   ^14For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to
   Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from
   executing the priest's office unto the Lord:

   ^15And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils,
   and for the calves which he had made.

   ^16And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their
   hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice
   unto the Lord God of their fathers.

   ^17So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son
   of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the way
   of David and Solomon.

   ^18And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of
   David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;

   ^19Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.

   ^20And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which bare
   him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.

   ^21And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his
   wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore
   concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore daughters.)

   ^22And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, to be ruler
   among his brethren: for he thought to make him king.

   ^23And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children throughout
   all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he
   gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 12

   And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had
   strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel
   with him.

   ^2And it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak
   king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed
   against the Lord,

   ^3With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and
   the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the
   Lubim, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.

   ^4And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came to
   Jerusalem.

   ^5Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of
   Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and
   said unto them, Thus saith the Lord, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore
   have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.

   ^6Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and
   they said, The Lord is righteous.

   ^7And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the
   Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; therefore
   I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my
   wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.

   ^8Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my
   service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.

   ^9So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the
   treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's
   house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which
   Solomon had made.

   ^10Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed
   them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of
   the king's house.

   ^11And when the king entered into the house of the Lord, the guard came
   and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.

   ^12And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord turned from him
   that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went
   well.

   ^13So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for
   Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord had
   chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his
   mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

   ^14And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.

   ^15Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in
   the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning
   genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam
   continually.

   ^16And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
   David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 13

   Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over
   Judah.

   ^2He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was
   Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between
   Abijah and Jeroboam.

   ^3And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of
   war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the
   battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men,
   being mighty men of valour.

   ^4And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim,
   and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel;

   ^5Ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom
   over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a
   covenant of salt?

   ^6Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of
   David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.

   ^7And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and
   have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when
   Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.

   ^8And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the Lord in the hand of
   the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with you
   golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.

   ^9Have ye not cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and
   the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations
   of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a
   young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are
   no gods.

   ^10But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him;
   and the priests, which minister unto the Lord, are the sons of Aaron,
   and the Levites wait upon their business:

   ^11And they burn unto the Lord every morning and every evening burnt
   sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon
   the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to
   burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the Lord our God; but ye
   have forsaken him.

   ^12And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests
   with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel,
   fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers; for ye shall not
   prosper.

   ^13But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they
   were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.

   ^14And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and
   behind: and they cried unto the Lord, and the priests sounded with the
   trumpets.

   ^15Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted,
   it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah
   and Judah.

   ^16And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them
   into their hand.

   ^17And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there
   fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.

   ^18Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the
   children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of
   their fathers.

   ^19And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel
   with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and
   Ephrain with the towns thereof.

   ^20Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah:
   and the Lord struck him, and he died.

   ^21But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
   twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

   ^22And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings,
   are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 14

   So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of
   David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was
   quiet ten years.

   ^2And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his
   God:

   ^3For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places,
   and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:

   ^4And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do
   the law and the commandment.

   ^5Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and
   the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.

   ^6And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he
   had no war in those years; because the Lord had given him rest.

   ^7Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make
   about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
   before us; because we have sought the Lord our God, we have sought him,
   and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.

   ^8And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah
   three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew
   bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were mighty men of
   valour.

   ^9And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a
   thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah.

   ^10Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in
   the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.

   ^11And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing
   with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power:
   help us, O Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go
   against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God; let not man prevail
   against thee.

   ^12So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah; and
   the Ethiopians fled.

   ^13And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar:
   and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
   themselves; for they were destroyed before the Lord, and before his
   host; and they carried away very much spoil.

   ^14And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the
   Lord came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was
   exceeding much spoil in them.

   ^15They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
   camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 15

   And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded:

   ^2And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and
   all Judah and Benjamin; The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and
   if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
   forsake you.

   ^3Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and
   without a teaching priest, and without law.

   ^4But when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel,
   and sought him, he was found of them.

   ^5And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to
   him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of
   the countries.

   ^6And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex
   them with all adversity.

   ^7Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work
   shall be rewarded.

   ^8And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet,
   he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land
   of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from
   mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the Lord, that was before the
   porch of the Lord.

   ^9And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them
   out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him
   out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was
   with him.

   ^10So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
   month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

   ^11And they offered unto the Lord the same time, of the spoil which
   they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

   ^12And they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their
   fathers with all their heart and with all their soul;

   ^13That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put
   to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.

   ^14And they sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting,
   and with trumpets, and with cornets.

   ^15And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all
   their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found
   of them: and the Lord gave them rest round about.

   ^16And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed
   her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa
   cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

   ^17But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless
   the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

   ^18And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had
   dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and
   vessels.

   ^19And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the
   reign of Asa.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 16

   In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel
   came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let
   none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.

   ^2Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
   house of the Lord and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king of
   Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,

   ^3There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my father
   and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy
   league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.

   ^4And Ben- hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his
   armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and
   Abel-maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.

   ^5And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off building
   of Ramah, and let his work cease.

   ^6Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of
   Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he
   built therewith Geba and Mizpah.

   ^7And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said
   unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied
   on the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped
   out of thine hand.

   ^8Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many
   chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the Lord, he
   delivered them into thine hand.

   ^9For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth,
   to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
   toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth
   thou shalt have wars.

   ^10Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for
   he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some
   of the people the same time.

   ^11And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written
   in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

   ^12And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in
   his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease he
   sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians.

   ^13And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth
   year of his reign.

   ^14And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for
   himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled
   with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the
   apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 17

   And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself
   against Israel.

   ^2And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set
   garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa
   his father had taken.

   ^3And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
   ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;

   ^4But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his
   commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.

   ^5Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah
   brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
   abundance.

   ^6And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord: moreover he took
   away the high places and groves out of Judah.

   ^7Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to
   Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to
   Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.

   ^8And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and
   Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah,
   and Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and
   Jehoram, priests.

   ^9And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord
   with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and
   taught the people.

   ^10And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
   that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against
   Jehoshaphat.

   ^11Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and
   tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and
   seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.

   ^12And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah
   castles, and cities of store.

   ^13And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war,
   mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.

   ^14And these are the numbers of them according to the house of their
   fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with
   him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.

   ^15And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred
   and fourscore thousand.

   ^16And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered
   himself unto the Lord; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of
   valour.

   ^17And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed
   men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.

   ^18And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore
   thousand ready prepared for the war.

   ^19These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the
   fenced cities throughout all Judah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 18

   Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity
   with Ahab.

   ^2And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab
   killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he
   had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead.

   ^3And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt
   thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art,
   and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.

   ^4And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee,
   at the word of the Lord to day.

   ^5Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four
   hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle,
   or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver it into
   the king's hand.

   ^6But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord
   besides, that we might enquire of him?

   ^7And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man,
   by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for he never
   prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son
   of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

   ^8And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said,
   Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.

   ^9And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of
   them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void
   place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets
   prophesied before them.

   ^10And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and
   said, Thus saith the Lord, With these thou shalt push Syria until they
   be consumed.

   ^11And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead,
   and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.

   ^12And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying,
   Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one
   assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and
   speak thou good.

   ^13And Micaiah said, As the Lord liveth, even what my God saith, that
   will I speak.

   ^14And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah,
   shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said,
   Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.

   ^15And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that
   thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the Lord?

   ^16Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as
   sheep that have no shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master;
   let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.

   ^17And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that
   he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?

   ^18Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the Lord; I saw the Lord
   sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his
   right hand and on his left.

   ^19And the Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may
   go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this manner,
   and another saying after that manner.

   ^20Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I
   will entice him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith?

   ^21And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of
   all his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou
   shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so.

   ^22Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth
   of these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against thee.

   ^23Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon
   the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to
   speak unto thee?

   ^24And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt
   go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.

   ^25Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to
   Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son;

   ^26And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and
   feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I
   return in peace.

   ^27And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath not
   the Lord spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.

   ^28So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to
   Ramothgilead.

   ^29And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise
   myself, and will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the
   king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.

   ^30Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots
   that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only
   with the king of Israel.

   ^31And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
   Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they
   compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the Lord
   helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.

   ^32For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots
   perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again
   from pursuing him.

   ^33And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of
   Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his
   chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the
   host; for I am wounded.

   ^34And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed
   himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about
   the time of the sun going down he died.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 19

   And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to
   Jerusalem.

   ^2And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to
   king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that
   hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

   ^3Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast
   taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to
   seek God.

   ^4And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the
   people from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the
   Lord God of their fathers.

   ^5And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of
   Judah, city by city,

   ^6And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for
   man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.

   ^7Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do
   it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of
   persons, nor taking of gifts.

   ^8Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the
   priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of
   the Lord, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.

   ^9And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the
   Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

   ^10And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell
   in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment,
   statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not
   against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren:
   this do, and ye shall not trespass.

   ^11And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of
   the Lord; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of
   Judah, for all the king's matters: also the Levites shall be officers
   before you. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 20

   It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and the
   children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came
   against Jehoshaphat to battle.

   ^2Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a
   great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria;
   and, behold, they be Hazazon-tamar, which is Engedi.

   ^3And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and
   proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

   ^4And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the Lord: even
   out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord.

   ^5And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in
   the house of the Lord, before the new court,

   ^6And said, O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and
   rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand
   is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?

   ^7Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this
   land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy
   friend for ever?

   ^8And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for
   thy name, saying,

   ^9If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence,
   or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy
   name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou
   wilt hear and help.

   ^10And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom
   thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of
   Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;

   ^11Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy
   possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.

   ^12O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against
   this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do:
   but our eyes are upon thee.

   ^13And all Judah stood before the Lord, with their little ones, their
   wives, and their children.

   ^14Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son
   of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the
   Spirit of the Lord in the midst of the congregation;

   ^15And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
   and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the Lord unto you, Be not afraid
   nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not
   yours, but God's.

   ^16To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff
   of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the
   wilderness of Jeruel.

   ^17Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand ye
   still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and
   Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them:
   for the Lord will be with you.

   ^18And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and all
   Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the Lord,
   worshipping the Lord.

   ^19And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the
   children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the Lord God of Israel
   with a loud voice on high.

   ^20And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the
   wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and
   said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the
   Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so
   shall ye prosper.

   ^21And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto
   the Lord, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went
   out before the army, and to say, Praise the Lord; for his mercy
   endureth for ever.

   ^22And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments
   against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come
   against Judah; and they were smitten.

   ^23For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants
   of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made
   an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.

   ^24And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they
   looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to
   the earth, and none escaped.

   ^25And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of
   them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead
   bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves,
   more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering
   of the spoil, it was so much.

   ^26And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of
   Berachah; for there they blessed the Lord: therefore the name of the
   same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.

   ^27Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and
   Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with
   joy; for the Lord had made them to rejoice over their enemies.

   ^28And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets
   unto the house of the Lord.

   ^29And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries, when
   they had heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of Israel.

   ^30So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest
   round about.

   ^31And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years old
   when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in
   Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

   ^32And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from
   it, doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord.

   ^33Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people
   had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.

   ^34Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold,
   they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is
   mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.

   ^35And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with
   Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:

   ^36And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and
   they made the ships in Eziongaber.

   ^37Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against
   Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the
   Lord hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were
   not able to go to Tarshish.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 21

   Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
   in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.

   ^2And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and
   Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these were the
   sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.

   ^3And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of
   precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he
   to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.

   ^4Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he
   strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and
   divers also of the princes of Israel.

   ^5Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

   ^6And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the
   house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought
   that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord.

   ^7Howbeit the Lord would not destroy the house of David, because of the
   covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a
   light to him and to his sons for ever.

   ^8In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah,
   and made themselves a king.

   ^9Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with
   him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed
   him in, and the captains of the chariots.

   ^10So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.
   The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he
   had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers.

   ^11Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused
   the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah
   thereto.

   ^12And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying,
   Thus saith the Lord God of David thy father, Because thou hast not
   walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa
   king of Judah,

   ^13But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made
   Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the
   whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy
   father's house, which were better than thyself:

   ^14Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy
   children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:

   ^15And thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until
   thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.

   ^16Moreover the Lord stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the
   Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians:

   ^17And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all
   the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also,
   and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz,
   the youngest of his sons.

   ^18And after all this the Lord smote him in his bowels with an
   incurable disease.

   ^19And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two
   years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of
   sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning
   of his fathers.

   ^20Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he
   reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired.
   Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres
   of the kings.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 22

   And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in
   his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp
   had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah
   reigned.

   ^2Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he
   reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah the
   daughter of Omri.

   ^3He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was
   his counsellor to do wickedly.

   ^4Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the Lord like the house of
   Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to
   his destruction.

   ^5He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of
   Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at
   Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.

   ^6And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which
   were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And
   Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the
   son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.

   ^7And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for
   when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of
   Nimshi, whom the Lord had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.

   ^8And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the
   house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the
   brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.

   ^9And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in
   Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they
   buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who
   sought the Lord with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no
   power to keep still the kingdom.

   ^10But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead,
   she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.

   ^11But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of
   Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain, and
   put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of
   king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister
   of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.

   ^12And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah
   reigned over the land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 23

   And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the
   captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son
   of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of
   Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.

   ^2And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the
   cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came
   to Jerusalem.

   ^3And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house
   of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king's son shall reign, as
   the Lord hath said of the sons of David.

   ^4This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on
   the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the
   doors;

   ^5And a third part shall be at the king's house; and a third part at
   the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be in the courts
   of the house of the Lord.

   ^6But let none come into the house of the Lord, save the priests, and
   they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they are holy:
   but all the people shall keep the watch of the Lord.

   ^7And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with
   his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the house, he
   shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and
   when he goeth out.

   ^8So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that
   Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were
   to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the
   sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.

   ^9Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds
   spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David's, which
   were in the house of God.

   ^10And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand,
   from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along
   by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.

   ^11Then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown,
   and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his
   sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.

   ^12Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising
   the king, she came to the people into the house of the Lord:

   ^13And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the
   entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the
   people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the
   singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise.
   Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.

   ^14Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that
   were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the
   ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For
   the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the Lord.

   ^15So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of
   the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there.

   ^16And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the
   people, and between the king, that they should be the Lord'S people.

   ^17Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down,
   and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the
   priest of Baal before the altars.

   ^18Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the Lord by the
   hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the
   house of the Lord, to offer the burnt offerings of the Lord, as it is
   written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was
   ordained by David.

   ^19And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that
   none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

   ^20And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the
   governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought
   down the king from the house of the Lord: and they came through the
   high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of
   the kingdom.

   ^21And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet,
   after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 24

   Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty
   years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Zibiah of Beersheba.

   ^2And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the
   days of Jehoiada the priest.

   ^3And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters.

   ^4And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair the
   house of the Lord.

   ^5And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to
   them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money
   to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye
   hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.

   ^6And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why
   hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out
   of Jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of Moses the
   servant of the Lord, and of the congregation of Israel, for the
   tabernacle of witness?

   ^7For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house
   of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the Lord did
   they bestow upon Baalim.

   ^8And at the king's commandment they made a chest, and set it without
   at the gate of the house of the Lord.

   ^9And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in
   to the Lord the collection that Moses the servant of God laid upon
   Israel in the wilderness.

   ^10And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and
   cast into the chest, until they had made an end.

   ^11Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto
   the king's office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that
   there was much money, the king's scribe and the high priest's officer
   came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place
   again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.

   ^12And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the
   service of the house of the Lord, and hired masons and carpenters to
   repair the house of the Lord, and also such as wrought iron and brass
   to mend the house of the Lord.

   ^13So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they
   set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.

   ^14And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money
   before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house
   of the Lord, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and spoons,
   and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the
   house of the Lord continually all the days of Jehoiada.

   ^15But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an
   hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.

   ^16And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he
   had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.

   ^17Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made
   obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.

   ^18And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served
   groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this
   their trespass.

   ^19Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the Lord; and
   they testified against them: but they would not give ear.

   ^20And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the
   priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith
   God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot
   prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he hath also forsaken you.

   ^21And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the
   commandment of the king in the court of the house of the Lord.

   ^22Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his
   father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said,
   The Lord look upon it, and require it.

   ^23And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of Syria
   came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and
   destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent
   all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.

   ^24For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and
   the Lord delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had
   forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. So they executed judgment
   against Joash.

   ^25And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great
   diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the
   sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and
   they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the
   sepulchres of the kings.

   ^26And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of
   Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.

   ^27Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon
   him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are written in
   the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his
   stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 25

   Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
   Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

   ^2And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not
   with a perfect heart.

   ^3Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he
   slew his servants that had killed the king his father.

   ^4But he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the law
   in the book of Moses, where the Lord commanded, saying, The fathers
   shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the
   fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.

   ^5Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over
   thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of their
   fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from
   twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand
   choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and
   shield.

   ^6He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel
   for an hundred talents of silver.

   ^7But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army
   of Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel, to wit, with
   all the children of Ephraim.

   ^8But if thou wilt go, do it, be strong for the battle: God shall make
   thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast
   down.

   ^9And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the
   hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man
   of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this.

   ^10Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him
   out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly
   kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.

   ^11And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went
   to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.

   ^12And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry
   away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them
   down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.

   ^13But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they
   should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from
   Samaria even unto Bethhoron, and smote three thousand of them, and took
   much spoil.

   ^14Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter
   of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and
   set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and
   burned incense unto them.

   ^15Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against Amaziah, and he
   sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought
   after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people
   out of thine hand?

   ^16And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto
   him, Art thou made of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou
   be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath
   determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not
   hearkened unto my counsel.

   ^17Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son
   of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see
   one another in the face.

   ^18And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The
   thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon,
   saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild
   beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.

   ^19Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart
   lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle
   to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with
   thee?

   ^20But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he might
   deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought after
   the gods of Edom.

   ^21So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the
   face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Beth- shemesh, which
   belongeth to Judah.

   ^22And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every
   man to his tent.

   ^23And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of
   Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Bethshemesh, and brought him to
   Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of
   Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.

   ^24And he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that
   were found in the house of God with Obededom, and the treasures of the
   king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.

   ^25And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of
   Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.

   ^26Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are
   they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?

   ^27Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the
   Lord they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to
   Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.

   ^28And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in
   the city of Judah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 26

   Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old,
   and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.

   ^2He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept
   with his fathers.

   ^3Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned
   fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah
   of Jerusalem.

   ^4And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that his father Amaziah did.

   ^5And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in
   the visions of God: and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to
   prosper.

   ^6And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down
   the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and
   built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.

   ^7And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians
   that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Mehunims.

   ^8And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad
   even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself
   exceedingly.

   ^9Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at
   the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them.

   ^10Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he
   had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen
   also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved
   husbandry.

   ^11Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by
   bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel
   the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of
   the king's captains.

   ^12The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of
   valour were two thousand and six hundred.

   ^13And under their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and seven
   thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the
   king against the enemy.

   ^14And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and
   spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast
   stones.

   ^15And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on
   the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones
   withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped,
   till he was strong.

   ^16But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction:
   for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the temple
   of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense.

   ^17And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore
   priests of the Lord, that were valiant men:

   ^18And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It
   appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but
   to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense:
   go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be
   for thine honour from the Lord God.

   ^19Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense:
   and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in
   his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside
   the incense altar.

   ^20And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him,
   and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out
   from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had
   smitten him.

   ^21And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt
   in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of
   the Lord: and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the
   people of the land.

   ^22Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the
   prophet, the son of Amoz, write.

   ^23So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his
   fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for
   they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 27

   Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was
   Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.

   ^2And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the
   temple of the Lord. And the people did yet corruptly.

   ^3He built the high gate of the house of the Lord, and on the wall of
   Ophel he built much.

   ^4Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the
   forests he built castles and towers.

   ^5He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against
   them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred
   talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand
   of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the
   second year, and the third.

   ^6So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the Lord
   his God.

   ^7Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways,
   lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

   ^8He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned
   sixteen years in Jerusalem.

   ^9And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of
   David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 28

   Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
   sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the
   sight of the Lord, like David his father:

   ^2For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also
   molten images for Baalim.

   ^3Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and
   burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen
   whom the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel.

   ^4He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the
   hills, and under every green tree.

   ^5Wherefore the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the king of
   Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them
   captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into
   the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.

   ^6For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty
   thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had
   forsaken the Lord God of their fathers.

   ^7And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king's son,
   and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the
   king.

   ^8And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two
   hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much
   spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.

   ^9But a prophet of the Lord was there, whose name was Oded: and he went
   out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold,
   because the Lord God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath
   delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that
   reacheth up unto heaven.

   ^10And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem
   for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even
   with you, sins against the Lord your God?

   ^11Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have
   taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the Lord is
   upon you.

   ^12Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the
   son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the
   son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that
   came from the war,

   ^13And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for
   whereas we have offended against the Lord already, ye intend to add
   more to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and
   there is fierce wrath against Israel.

   ^14So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes
   and all the congregation.

   ^15And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the
   captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them,
   and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and
   anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and
   brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren:
   then they returned to Samaria.

   ^16At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help
   him.

   ^17For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away
   captives.

   ^18The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and
   of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and
   Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the
   villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt
   there.

   ^19For the Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for
   he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord.

   ^20And Tilgath- pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed
   him, but strengthened him not.

   ^21For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the Lord, and out
   of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king
   of Assyria: but he helped him not.

   ^22And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the
   Lord: this is that king Ahaz.

   ^23For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he
   said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will
   I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of
   him, and of all Israel.

   ^24And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut
   in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the
   house of the Lord, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.

   ^25And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn
   incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the Lord God of his
   fathers.

   ^26Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last,
   behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

   ^27And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city,
   even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the
   kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 29

   Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he
   reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
   Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.

   ^2And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
   to all that David his father had done.

   ^3He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the
   doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them.

   ^4And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them
   together into the east street,

   ^5And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and
   sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the
   filthiness out of the holy place.

   ^6For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the
   eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away
   their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs.

   ^7Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps,
   and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy
   place unto the God of Israel.

   ^8Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he
   hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye
   see with your eyes.

   ^9For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our
   daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.

   ^10Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the Lord God of
   Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.

   ^11My sons, be not now negligent: for the Lord hath chosen you to stand
   before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and
   burn incense.

   ^12Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son
   of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari,
   Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the
   Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:

   ^13And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of
   Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah:

   ^14And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of
   Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.

   ^15And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and
   came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the
   Lord, to cleanse the house of the Lord.

   ^16And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the Lord,
   to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in
   the temple of the Lord into the court of the house of the Lord. And the
   Levites took it, to carry it out abroad into the brook Kidron.

   ^17Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and
   on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the Lord: so
   they sanctified the house of the Lord in eight days; and in the
   sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.

   ^18Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed
   all the house of the Lord, and the altar of burnt offering, with all
   the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the vessels
   thereof.

   ^19Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away
   in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold,
   they are before the altar of the Lord.

   ^20Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the
   city, and went up to the house of the Lord.

   ^21And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs,
   and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for the
   sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of
   Aaron to offer them on the altar of the Lord.

   ^22So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and
   sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the rams,
   they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the lambs,
   and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.

   ^23And they brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before the
   king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:

   ^24And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with their
   blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for the king
   commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made
   for all Israel.

   ^25And he set the Levites in the house of the Lord with cymbals, with
   psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and
   of Gad the king's seer, and Nathan the prophet: for so was the
   commandment of the Lord by his prophets.

   ^26And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests
   with the trumpets.

   ^27And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar.
   And when the burnt offering began, the song of the Lord began also with
   the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by David king of
   Israel.

   ^28And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and the
   trumpeters sounded: and all this continued until the burnt offering was
   finished.

   ^29And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that
   were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.

   ^30Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to
   sing praise unto the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the
   seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads
   and worshipped.

   ^31Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves
   unto the Lord, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into
   the house of the Lord. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and
   thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.

   ^32And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation
   brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, and two
   hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt offering to the Lord.

   ^33And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand
   sheep.

   ^34But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the
   burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them,
   till the work was ended, and until the other priests had sanctified
   themselves: for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify
   themselves than the priests.

   ^35And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the
   peace offerings, and the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So
   the service of the house of the Lord was set in order.

   ^36And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared the
   people: for the thing was done suddenly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 30

   And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to
   Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lord at
   Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the Lord God of Israel.

   ^2For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the
   congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.

   ^3For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not
   sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people gathered
   themselves together to Jerusalem.

   ^4And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.

   ^5So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all
   Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the
   passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not
   done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.

   ^6So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes
   throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of
   the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God
   of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of
   you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.

   ^7And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which
   trespassed against the Lord God of their fathers, who therefore gave
   them up to desolation, as ye see.

   ^8Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves
   unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified
   for ever: and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of his wrath
   may turn away from you.

   ^9For if ye turn again unto the Lord, your brethren and your children
   shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they
   shall come again into this land: for the Lord your God is gracious and
   merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto
   him.

   ^10So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim
   and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and
   mocked them.

   ^11Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled
   themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

   ^12Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the
   commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the Lord.

   ^13And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of
   unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.

   ^14And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and
   all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the brook
   Kidron.

   ^15Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the second
   month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified
   themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the
   Lord.

   ^16And they stood in their place after their manner, according to the
   law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood, which
   they received of the hand of the Levites.

   ^17For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified:
   therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers
   for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the Lord.

   ^18For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and Manasseh,
   Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat
   the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for
   them, saying, The good Lord pardon every one

   ^19That prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers,
   though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
   sanctuary.

   ^20And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.

   ^21And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the
   feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the
   Levites and the priests praised the Lord day by day, singing with loud
   instruments unto the Lord.

   ^22And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the
   good knowledge of the Lord: and they did eat throughout the feast seven
   days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the Lord God
   of their fathers.

   ^23And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days: and
   they kept other seven days with gladness.

   ^24For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand
   bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the
   congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a great
   number of priests sanctified themselves.

   ^25And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites,
   and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers
   that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.

   ^26So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon
   the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem.

   ^27Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their
   voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place,
   even unto heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 31

   Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out
   to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down
   the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all
   Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had
   utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned,
   every man to his possession, into their own cities.

   ^2And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites
   after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests
   and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister,
   and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the
   Lord.

   ^3He appointed also the king's portion of his substance for the burnt
   offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the
   burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the
   set feasts, as it is written in the law of the Lord.

   ^4Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the
   portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged
   in the law of the Lord.

   ^5And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel
   brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey,
   and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all things
   brought they in abundantly.

   ^6And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the
   cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and
   the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the Lord their
   God, and laid them by heaps.

   ^7In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and
   finished them in the seventh month.

   ^8And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they
   blessed the Lord, and his people Israel.

   ^9Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning
   the heaps.

   ^10And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and
   said, Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of
   the Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the Lord
   hath blessed his people; and that which is left is this great store.

   ^11Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the
   Lord; and they prepared them,

   ^12And brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated things
   faithfully: over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his
   brother was the next.

   ^13And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and
   Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were
   overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the
   commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of
   God.

   ^14And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east,
   was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of
   the Lord, and the most holy things.

   ^15And next him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah,
   Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set
   office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as
   to the small:

   ^16Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward,
   even unto every one that entereth into the house of the Lord, his daily
   portion for their service in their charges according to their courses;

   ^17Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers,
   and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by
   their courses;

   ^18And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and
   their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation: for in
   their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness:

   ^19Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of
   the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were
   expressed by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests,
   and to all that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites.

   ^20And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that which
   was good and right and truth before the Lord his God.

   ^21And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God,
   and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it
   with all his heart, and prospered.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 32

   After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of
   Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced
   cities, and thought to win them for himself.

   ^2And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was
   purposed to fight against Jerusalem,

   ^3He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the
   waters of the fountains which were without the city: and they did help
   him.

   ^4So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the
   fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land,
   saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?

   ^5Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was
   broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and
   repaired Millo in the city of David, and made darts and shields in
   abundance.

   ^6And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them
   together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake
   comfortably to them, saying,

   ^7Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of
   Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more
   with us than with him:

   ^8With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help
   us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the
   words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

   ^9After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to
   Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against Lachish, and all his
   power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that
   were at Jerusalem, saying,

   ^10Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye
   abide in the siege in Jerusalem?

   ^11Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by
   famine and by thirst, saying, The Lord our God shall deliver us out of
   the hand of the king of Assyria?

   ^12Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his
   altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship
   before one altar, and burn incense upon it?

   ^13Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the people of
   other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able
   to deliver their lands out of mine hand?

   ^14Who was there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers
   utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that
   your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?

   ^15Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this
   manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom
   was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of
   my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine hand?

   ^16And his servants spake yet more against the Lord God, and against
   his servant Hezekiah.

   ^17He wrote also letters to rail on the Lord God of Israel, and to
   speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands
   have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God
   of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.

   ^18Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' speech unto the
   people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to
   trouble them; that they might take the city.

   ^19And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of
   the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man.

   ^20And for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son
   of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.

   ^21And the Lord sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of
   valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of
   Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he
   was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own
   bowels slew him there with the sword.

   ^22Thus the Lord saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from
   the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all
   other, and guided them on every side.

   ^23And many brought gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to
   Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of all
   nations from thenceforth.

   ^24In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the
   Lord: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.

   ^25But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto
   him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him,
   and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

   ^26Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart,
   both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord
   came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.

   ^27And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made
   himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones,
   and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant jewels;

   ^28Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and
   stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.

   ^29Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds
   in abundance: for God had given him substance very much.

   ^30This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and
   brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And
   Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

   ^31Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of
   Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in
   the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in
   his heart.

   ^32Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, they
   are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, and
   in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

   ^33And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
   chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his
   son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 33

   Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
   fifty and five years in Jerusalem:

   ^2But did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, like unto the
   abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord had cast out before the
   children of Israel.

   ^3For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had
   broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and
   worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.

   ^4Also he built altars in the house of the Lord, whereof the Lord had
   said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.

   ^5And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of
   the house of the Lord.

   ^6And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley of
   the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and
   used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he
   wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.

   ^7And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house
   of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this
   house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of
   Israel, will I put my name for ever:

   ^8Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the
   land which I have appointed for your fathers; so that they will take
   heed to do all that I have commanded them, according to the whole law
   and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.

   ^9So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and
   to do worse than the heathen, whom the Lord had destroyed before the
   children of Israel.

   ^10And the Lord spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would
   not hearken.

   ^11Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the
   king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him
   with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

   ^12And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and
   humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers,

   ^13And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his
   supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then
   Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God.

   ^14Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the
   west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish
   gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height,
   and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.

   ^15And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of
   the Lord, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the
   house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.

   ^16And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace
   offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord
   God of Israel.

   ^17Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet
   unto the Lord their God only.

   ^18Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God,
   and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the Lord
   God of Israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of
   Israel.

   ^19His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and all his sin,
   and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set
   up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they are
   written among the sayings of the seers.

   ^20So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own
   house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

   ^21Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
   reigned two years in Jerusalem.

   ^22But he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as did
   Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images
   which Manasseh his father had made, and served them;

   ^23And humbled not himself before the Lord, as Manasseh his father had
   humbled himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.

   ^24And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
   house.

   ^25But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against
   king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his
   stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 34

   Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in
   Jerusalem one and thirty years.

   ^2And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked
   in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the right
   hand, nor to the left.

   ^3For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began
   to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he
   began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the
   groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.

   ^4And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the
   images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and
   the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made
   dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had
   sacrificed unto them.

   ^5And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed
   Judah and Jerusalem.

   ^6And so did he in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon,
   even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.

   ^7And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten
   the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols throughout
   all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.

   ^8Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land,
   and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the
   governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to
   repair the house of the Lord his God.

   ^9And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the
   money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that
   kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of
   all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they
   returned to Jerusalem.

   ^10And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of
   the house of the Lord, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in
   the house of the Lord, to repair and amend the house:

   ^11Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone,
   and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of
   Judah had destroyed.

   ^12And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them were
   Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah
   and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward; and
   other of the Levites, all that could skill of instruments of musick.

   ^13Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers of
   all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the Levites
   there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

   ^14And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house
   of the Lord, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the Lord
   given by Moses.

   ^15And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found
   the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah delivered the
   book to Shaphan.

   ^16And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king word
   back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do it.

   ^17And they have gathered together the money that was found in the
   house of the Lord, and have delivered it into the hand of the
   overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

   ^18Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest
   hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.

   ^19And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law,
   that he rent his clothes.

   ^20And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and
   Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of
   the king's, saying,

   ^21Go, enquire of the Lord for me, and for them that are left in Israel
   and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found: for great
   is the wrath of the Lord that is poured out upon us, because our
   fathers have not kept the word of the Lord, to do after all that is
   written in this book.

   ^22And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to Huldah
   the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of
   Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the
   college:) and they spake to her to that effect.

   ^23And she answered them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell ye
   the man that sent you to me,

   ^24Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and
   upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written in
   the book which they have read before the king of Judah:

   ^25Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other
   gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their
   hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and
   shall not be quenched.

   ^26And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the Lord,
   so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel concerning
   the words which thou hast heard;

   ^27Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before
   God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the
   inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend
   thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the
   Lord.

   ^28Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
   gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the
   evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the
   same. So they brought the king word again.

   ^29Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and
   Jerusalem.

   ^30And the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of
   Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the
   Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their ears
   all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house
   of the Lord.

   ^31And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the
   Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his
   testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his
   soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this
   book.

   ^32And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
   stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
   covenant of God, the God of their fathers.

   ^33And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries
   that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were
   present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all
   his days they departed not from following the Lord, the God of their
   fathers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 35

   Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the Lord in Jerusalem: and they
   killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

   ^2And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the
   service of the house of the Lord,

   ^3And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy
   unto the Lord, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of
   David king of Israel did build; it shall not be a burden upon your
   shoulders: serve now the Lord your God, and his people Israel,

   ^4And prepare yourselves by the houses of your fathers, after your
   courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and
   according to the writing of Solomon his son.

   ^5And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
   families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
   division of the families of the Levites.

   ^6So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your
   brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the
   hand of Moses.

   ^7And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all for
   the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number of
   thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the king's
   substance.

   ^8And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and
   to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house
   of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two thousand
   and six hundred small cattle, and three hundred oxen.

   ^9Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and
   Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the
   Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five
   hundred oxen.

   ^10So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place,
   and the Levites in their courses, according to the king's commandment.

   ^11And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood
   from their hands, and the Levites flayed them.

   ^12And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according
   to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer unto the Lord,
   as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they with the oxen.

   ^13And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance:
   but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in
   pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.

   ^14And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests:
   because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering of burnt
   offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for
   themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.

   ^15And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according to
   the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's
   seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not depart from
   their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.

   ^16So all the service of the Lord was prepared the same day, to keep
   the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the Lord,
   according to the commandment of king Josiah.

   ^17And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at
   that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.

   ^18And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days
   of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a
   passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all
   Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

   ^19In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover
   kept.

   ^20After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of
   Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah
   went out against him.

   ^21But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee,
   thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the
   house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear
   thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not.

   ^22Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised
   himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words
   of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of
   Megiddo.

   ^23And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his
   servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.

   ^24His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in
   the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and
   he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And
   all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

   ^25And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and the
   singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and
   made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are written in the
   lamentations.

   ^26Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to
   that which was written in the law of the Lord,

   ^27And his deeds, first and last, behold, they are written in the book
   of the kings of Israel and Judah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter Chronicles 36

   Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made
   him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.

   ^2Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign, and
   he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

   ^3And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the
   land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.

   ^4And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and
   Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz
   his brother, and carried him to Egypt.

   ^5Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and
   he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in
   the sight of the Lord his God.

   ^6Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in
   fetters, to carry him to Babylon.

   ^7Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the Lord
   to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.

   ^8Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he
   did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the
   book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned
   in his stead.

   ^9Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
   three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil
   in the sight of the Lord.

   ^10And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought
   him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the Lord, and
   made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.

   ^11Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
   reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.

   ^12And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and
   humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth
   of the Lord.

   ^13And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him
   swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from
   turning unto the Lord God of Israel.

   ^14Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed
   very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the
   house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.

   ^15And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers,
   rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his
   people, and on his dwelling place:

   ^16But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
   misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
   people, till there was no remedy.

   ^17Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew
   their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had
   no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped
   for age: he gave them all into his hand.

   ^18And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the
   treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king, and
   of his princes; all these he brought to Babylon.

   ^19And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of
   Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed
   all the goodly vessels thereof.

   ^20And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon;
   where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the
   kingdom of Persia:

   ^21To fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the
   land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept
   sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.

   ^22Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the
   Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord
   stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a
   proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
   saying,

   ^23Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath
   the Lord God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an
   house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all
   his people? The Lord his God be with him, and let him go up.
     __________________________________________________________________

Ezra
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the
   Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up
   the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation
   throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,

   ^2Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me
   all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an
   house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

   ^3Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and
   let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of
   the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem.

   ^4And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men
   of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and
   with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God that is
   in Jerusalem.

   ^5Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the
   priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised, to
   go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem.

   ^6And all they that were about them strengthened their hands with
   vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with
   precious things, beside all that was willingly offered.

   ^7Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the
   Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had
   put them in the house of his gods;

   ^8Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of
   Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the
   prince of Judah.

   ^9And this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a thousand
   chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives,

   ^10Thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a second sort four hundred
   and ten, and other vessels a thousand.

   ^11All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four
   hundred. All these did Sheshbazzar bring up with them of the captivity
   that were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the
   captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar
   the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto
   Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city;

   ^2Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah,
   Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men
   of the people of Israel:

   ^3The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.

   ^4The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

   ^5The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five.

   ^6The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two
   thousand eight hundred and twelve.

   ^7The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

   ^8The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and five.

   ^9The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

   ^10The children of Bani, six hundred forty and two.

   ^11The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three.

   ^12The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two.

   ^13The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six.

   ^14The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six.

   ^15The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four.

   ^16The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.

   ^17The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three.

   ^18The children of Jorah, an hundred and twelve.

   ^19The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three.

   ^20The children of Gibbar, ninety and five.

   ^21The children of Bethlehem, an hundred twenty and three.

   ^22The men of Netophah, fifty and six.

   ^23The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.

   ^24The children of Azmaveth, forty and two.

   ^25The children of Kirjath-arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred
   and forty and three.

   ^26The children of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.

   ^27The men of Michmas, an hundred twenty and two.

   ^28The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty and three.

   ^29The children of Nebo, fifty and two.

   ^30The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six.

   ^31The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and
   four.

   ^32The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

   ^33The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five.

   ^34The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.

   ^35The children of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty.

   ^36The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine
   hundred seventy and three.

   ^37The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.

   ^38The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.

   ^39The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

   ^40The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of
   Hodaviah, seventy and four.

   ^41The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight.

   ^42The children of the porters: the children of Shallum, the children
   of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of
   Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all an hundred thirty and nine.

   ^43The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the
   children of Tabbaoth,

   ^44The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon,

   ^45The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of
   Akkub,

   ^46The children of Hagab, the children of Shalmai, the children of
   Hanan,

   ^47The children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of
   Reaiah,

   ^48The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of
   Gazzam,

   ^49The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai,

   ^50The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of
   Nephusim,

   ^51The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of
   Harhur,

   ^52The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of
   Harsha,

   ^53The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of
   Thamah,

   ^54The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

   ^55The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the
   children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda,

   ^56The children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of
   Giddel,

   ^57The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of
   Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami.

   ^58All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were
   three hundred ninety and two.

   ^59And these were they which went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub,
   Addan, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's house, and
   their seed, whether they were of Israel:

   ^60The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of
   Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.

   ^61And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the
   children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; which took a wife of the
   daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name:

   ^62These sought their register among those that were reckoned by
   genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted,
   put from the priesthood.

   ^63And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
   most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with
   Thummim.

   ^64The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three
   hundred and threescore,

   ^65Beside their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven
   thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and there were among them two
   hundred singing men and singing women.

   ^66Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two
   hundred forty and five;

   ^67Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; their asses, six
   thousand seven hundred and twenty.

   ^68And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of
   the Lord which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God to
   set it up in his place:

   ^69They gave after their ability unto the treasure of the work
   threescore and one thousand drams of gold, and five thousand pound of
   silver, and one hundred priests garments.

   ^70So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the
   singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, and
   all Israel in their cities.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were in
   the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to
   Jerusalem.

   ^2Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the
   priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and
   builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings
   thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God.

   ^3And they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them because
   of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt offerings
   thereon unto the Lord, even burnt offerings morning and evening.

   ^4They kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
   offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom,
   as the duty of every day required;

   ^5And afterward offered the continual burnt offering, both of the new
   moons, and of all the set feasts of the Lord that were consecrated, and
   of every one that willingly offered a freewill offering unto the Lord.

   ^6From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
   offerings unto the Lord. But the foundation of the temple of the Lord
   was not yet laid.

   ^7They gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and
   meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to
   bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, according to the
   grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.

   ^8Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at
   Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
   and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the
   priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the
   captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years
   old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the Lord.

   ^9Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and his
   sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the
   house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brethren
   the Levites.

   ^10And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord,
   they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites
   the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance
   of David king of Israel.

   ^11And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto
   the Lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever toward
   Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they
   praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the Lord was
   laid.

   ^12But many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, who
   were ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation of
   this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and many
   shouted aloud for joy:

   ^13So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy
   from the noise of the weeping of the people: for the people shouted
   with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children
   of the captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel;

   ^2Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and
   said unto them, Let us build with you: for we seek your God, as ye do;
   and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esar- haddon king of
   Assur, which brought us up hither.

   ^3But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers
   of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to build an
   house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the Lord
   God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded us.

   ^4Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of
   Judah, and troubled them in building,

   ^5And hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all
   the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king
   of Persia.

   ^6And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote
   they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and
   Jerusalem.

   ^7And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and
   the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the
   writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted
   in the Syrian tongue.

   ^8Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against
   Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort:

   ^9Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the
   rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the
   Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the
   Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,

   ^10And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnapper
   brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria, and the rest that are
   on this side the river, and at such a time.

   ^11This is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto
   Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side the river, and
   at such a time.

   ^12Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee to
   us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad city,
   and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations.

   ^13Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and
   the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and
   custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings.

   ^14Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace, and it was
   not meet for us to see the king's dishonour, therefore have we sent and
   certified the king;

   ^15That search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers:
   so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city
   is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that
   they have moved sedition within the same of old time: for which cause
   was this city destroyed.

   ^16We certify the king that, if this city be builded again, and the
   walls thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this
   side the river.

   ^17Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to
   Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dwell in
   Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a time.

   ^18The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before me.

   ^19And I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that
   this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that
   rebellion and sedition have been made therein.

   ^20There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled
   over all countries beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and custom, was
   paid unto them.

   ^21Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that this
   city be not builded, until another commandment shall be given from me.

   ^22Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to
   the hurt of the kings?

   ^23Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum,
   and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went up in haste to
   Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power.

   ^24Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem. So
   it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Then the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo,
   prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name
   of the God of Israel, even unto them.

   ^2Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of
   Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem: and
   with them were the prophets of God helping them.

   ^3At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the
   river, and Shethar- boznai, and their companions, and said thus unto
   them, Who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this
   wall?

   ^4Then said we unto them after this manner, What are the names of the
   men that make this building?

   ^5But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they
   could not cause them to cease, till the matter came to Darius: and then
   they returned answer by letter concerning this matter.

   ^6The copy of the letter that Tatnai, governor on this side the river,
   and Shethar- boznai, and his companions the Apharsachites, which were
   on this side the river, sent unto Darius the king:

   ^7They sent a letter unto him, wherein was written thus; Unto Darius
   the king, all peace.

   ^8Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judea,
   to the house of the great God, which is builded with great stones, and
   timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on, and
   prospereth in their hands.

   ^9Then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, Who commanded
   you to build this house, and to make up these walls?

   ^10We asked their names also, to certify thee, that we might write the
   names of the men that were the chief of them.

   ^11And thus they returned us answer, saying, We are the servants of the
   God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these
   many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and set up.

   ^12But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto
   wrath, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
   Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people
   away into Babylon.

   ^13But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon the same king
   Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God.

   ^14And the vessels also of gold and silver of the house of God, which
   Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and
   brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take
   out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one, whose
   name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor;

   ^15And said unto him, Take these vessels, go, carry them into the
   temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his
   place.

   ^16Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid the foundation of the house
   of God which is in Jerusalem: and since that time even until now hath
   it been in building, and yet it is not finished.

   ^17Now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search made
   in the king's treasure house, which is there at Babylon, whether it be
   so, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this house of God
   at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this
   matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of
   the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon.

   ^2And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the
   province of the Medes, a roll, and therein was a record thus written:

   ^3In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a
   decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be
   builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the
   foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore
   cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits;

   ^4With three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the
   expences be given out of the king's house:

   ^5And also let the golden and silver vessels of the house of God, which
   Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem, and
   brought unto Babylon, be restored, and brought again unto the temple
   which is at Jerusalem, every one to his place, and place them in the
   house of God.

   ^6Now therefore, Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shethar-boznai, and
   your companions the Apharsachites, which are beyond the river, be ye
   far from thence:

   ^7Let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews
   and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in his place.

   ^8Moreover I make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of these Jews
   for the building of this house of God: that of the king's goods, even
   of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expences be given unto these
   men, that they be not hindered.

   ^9And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and
   lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine,
   and oil, according to the appointment of the priests which are at
   Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail:

   ^10That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of
   heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.

   ^11Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let
   timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be
   hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this.

   ^12And the God that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy all
   kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy
   this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree;
   let it be done with speed.

   ^13Then Tatnai, governor on this side the river, Shethar-boznai, and
   their companions, according to that which Darius the king had sent, so
   they did speedily.

   ^14And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the
   prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And
   they builded, and finished it, according to the commandment of the God
   of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and
   Artaxerxes king of Persia.

   ^15And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar,
   which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.

   ^16And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the
   rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this
   house of God with joy,

   ^17And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred
   bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering
   for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes
   of Israel.

   ^18And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in
   their courses, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem; as it is
   written in the book of Moses.

   ^19And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the
   fourteenth day of the first month.

   ^20For the priests and the Levites were purified together, all of them
   were pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the
   captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.

   ^21And the children of Israel, which were come again out of captivity,
   and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness
   of the heathen of the land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat,

   ^22And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy: for the
   Lord had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the king of Assyria
   unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God,
   the God of Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra
   the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,

   ^2The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,

   ^3The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,

   ^4The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,

   ^5The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son
   of Aaron the chief priest:

   ^6This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the law
   of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had given: and the king granted
   him all his request, according to the hand of the Lord his God upon
   him.

   ^7And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the priests,
   and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims,
   unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.

   ^8And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh
   year of the king.

   ^9For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from
   Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem,
   according to the good hand of his God upon him.

   ^10For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to
   do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments.

   ^11Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave
   unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the
   commandments of the Lord, and of his statutes to Israel.

   ^12Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law
   of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time.

   ^13I make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and of his
   priests and Levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own
   freewill to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee.

   ^14Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven
   counsellors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
   the law of thy God which is in thine hand;

   ^15And to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors
   have freely offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in
   Jerusalem,

   ^16And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province
   of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the
   priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which is in
   Jerusalem:

   ^17That thou mayest buy speedily with this money bullocks, rams, lambs,
   with their meat offerings and their drink offerings, and offer them
   upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.

   ^18And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to do
   with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of
   your God.

   ^19The vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house of
   thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.

   ^20And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which
   thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's
   treasure house.

   ^21And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the
   treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the priest,
   the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be
   done speedily,

   ^22Unto an hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred measures of
   wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil,
   and salt without prescribing how much.

   ^23Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently
   done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should there be wrath
   against the realm of the king and his sons?

   ^24Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites,
   singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it
   shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.

   ^25And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand,
   set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that are
   beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye
   them that know them not.

   ^26And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
   king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
   death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
   imprisonment.

   ^27Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which hath put such a thing
   as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is
   in Jerusalem:

   ^28And hath extended mercy unto me before the king, and his
   counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes. And I was
   strengthened as the hand of the Lord my God was upon me, and I gathered
   together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the genealogy of
   them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the
   king.

   ^2Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of
   the sons of David; Hattush.

   ^3Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and
   with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.

   ^4Of the sons of Pahath- moab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with
   him two hundred males.

   ^5Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him three
   hundred males.

   ^6Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him
   fifty males.

   ^7And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him
   seventy males.

   ^8And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with
   him fourscore males.

   ^9Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two
   hundred and eighteen males.

   ^10And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him an
   hundred and threescore males.

   ^11And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him
   twenty and eight males.

   ^12And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him
   an hundred and ten males.

   ^13And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names are these, Eliphelet,
   Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them threescore males.

   ^14Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them seventy
   males.

   ^15And I gathered them together to the river than runneth to Ahava; and
   there abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people, and the
   priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.

   ^16Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan,
   and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and
   for Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of
   understanding.

   ^17And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place
   Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his
   brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring
   unto us ministers for the house of our God.

   ^18And by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of
   understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of
   Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen;

   ^19And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his
   brethren and their sons, twenty;

   ^20Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for
   the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of
   them were expressed by name.

   ^21Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river of Ahava, that we might
   afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us,
   and for our little ones, and for all our substance.

   ^22For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and
   horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had spoken
   unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for good
   that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them that
   forsake him.

   ^23So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of
   us.

   ^24Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah,
   Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,

   ^25And weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels,
   even the offering of the house of our God, which the king, and his
   counsellors, and his lords, and all Israel there present, had offered:

   ^26I even weighed unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of
   silver, and silver vessels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred
   talents;

   ^27Also twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of
   fine copper, precious as gold.

   ^28And I said unto them, Ye are holy unto the Lord; the vessels are
   holy also; and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto the
   Lord God of your fathers.

   ^29Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chief of the
   priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at
   Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the Lord.

   ^30So took the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and
   the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house of
   our God.

   ^31Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the
   first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us,
   and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in
   wait by the way.

   ^32And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.

   ^33Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels
   weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of
   Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and
   with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui,
   Levites;

   ^34By number and by weight of every one: and all the weight was written
   at that time.

   ^35Also the children of those that had been carried away, which were
   come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the God of
   Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy
   and seven lambs, twelve he goats for a sin offering: all this was a
   burnt offering unto the Lord.

   ^36And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's
   lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they
   furthered the people, and the house of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying, The
   people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated
   themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to their
   abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the
   Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the
   Amorites.

   ^2For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their
   sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of
   those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in
   this trespass.

   ^3And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and
   plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down astonied.

   ^4Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of
   the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that had been
   carried away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.

   ^5And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heaviness; and having
   rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread out my
   hands unto the Lord my God.

   ^6And said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to
   thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our
   trespass is grown up unto the heavens.

   ^7Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto
   this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests,
   been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword,
   to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this
   day.

   ^8And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the Lord our
   God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy
   place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving
   in our bondage.

   ^9For we were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage,
   but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to
   give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the
   desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.

   ^10And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have
   forsaken thy commandments,

   ^11Which thou hast commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The
   land, unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land with the
   filthiness of the people of the lands, with their abominations, which
   have filled it from one end to another with their uncleanness.

   ^12Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither take
   their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their wealth
   for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and
   leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.

   ^13And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our
   great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our
   iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this;

   ^14Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with
   the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be angry with us
   till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor
   escaping?

   ^15O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous: for we remain yet escaped,
   as it is this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespasses: for we
   cannot stand before thee because of this.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and
   casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him
   out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children:
   for the people wept very sore.

   ^2And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered
   and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and have taken
   strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is hope in
   Israel concerning this thing.

   ^3Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the
   wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my
   lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and let
   it be done according to the law.

   ^4Arise; for this matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with
   thee: be of good courage, and do it.

   ^5Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and all
   Israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. And they
   sware.

   ^6Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the
   chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when he came thither, he
   did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the
   transgression of them that had been carried away.

   ^7And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto all
   the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves
   together unto Jerusalem;

   ^8And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the
   counsel of the princes and the elders, all his substance should be
   forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of those that
   had been carried away.

   ^9Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together
   unto Jerusalem within three days. It was the ninth month, on the
   twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street of the
   house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain.

   ^10And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have
   transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass of
   Israel.

   ^11Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your fathers, and
   do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the land,
   and from the strange wives.

   ^12Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice, As
   thou hast said, so must we do.

   ^13But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are
   not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or two:
   for we are many that have transgressed in this thing.

   ^14Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all them
   which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed times,
   and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until
   the fierce wrath of our God for this matter be turned from us.

   ^15Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah were
   employed about this matter: and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite
   helped them.

   ^16And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with
   certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers, and all
   of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the first day
   of the tenth month to examine the matter.

   ^17And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange wives
   by the first day of the first month.

   ^18And among the sons of the priests there were found that had taken
   strange wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and
   his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.

   ^19And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives; and
   being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass.

   ^20And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah.

   ^21And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and
   Jehiel, and Uzziah.

   ^22And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel,
   Jozabad, and Elasah.

   ^23Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is
   Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.

   ^24Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and
   Telem, and Uri.

   ^25Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and
   Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.

   ^26And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi,
   and Jeremoth, and Eliah.

   ^27And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and
   Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.

   ^28Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.

   ^29And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and
   Sheal, and Ramoth.

   ^30And of the sons of Pahath-moab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah,
   Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.

   ^31And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah,
   Shimeon,

   ^32Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.

   ^33Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet,
   Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.

   ^34Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel,

   ^35Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,

   ^36Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,

   ^37Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,

   ^38And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,

   ^39And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,

   ^40Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,

   ^41PrAzareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,

   ^42Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph.

   ^43Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and
   Joel, Benaiah.

   ^44All these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by
   whom they had children.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Nehemiah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass in the
   month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,

   ^2That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men of Judah;
   and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left
   of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

   ^3And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity
   there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall of
   Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with
   fire.

   ^4And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and
   wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God
   of heaven,

   ^5And said, I beseech thee, O Lord God of heaven, the great and
   terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him
   and observe his commandments:

   ^6Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest
   hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and
   night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of
   the children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and
   my father's house have sinned.

   ^7We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the
   commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou
   commandedst thy servant Moses.

   ^8Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant
   Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the
   nations:

   ^9But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though
   there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet
   will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that
   I have chosen to set my name there.

   ^10Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed
   by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.

   ^11O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer
   of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear
   thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him
   mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's cupbearer.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of
   Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I took up the wine,
   and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his
   presence.

   ^2Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing
   thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was
   very sore afraid,

   ^3And said unto the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my
   countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres,
   lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?

   ^4Then the king said unto me, For what dost thou make request? So I
   prayed to the God of heaven.

   ^5And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant
   have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah,
   unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build it.

   ^6And the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) For how
   long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it pleased the
   king to send me; and I set him a time.

   ^7Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters be
   given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me
   over till I come into Judah;

   ^8And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, that he may
   give me timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which
   appertained to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the
   house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to
   the good hand of my God upon me.

   ^9Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the
   king's letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen
   with me.

   ^10When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite,
   heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come a man to
   seek the welfare of the children of Israel.

   ^11So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.

   ^12And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I
   any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: neither was
   there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.

   ^13And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the
   dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem,
   which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.

   ^14Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's pool:
   but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.

   ^15Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and
   turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so returned.

   ^16And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I
   as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor
   to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.

   ^17Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how
   Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire:
   come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a
   reproach.

   ^18Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as
   also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let us
   rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good work.

   ^19But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the
   Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn,
   and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel
   against the king?

   ^20Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he will
   prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and build: but ye have
   no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests,
   and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the
   doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the
   tower of Hananeel.

   ^2And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them
   builded Zaccur the son of Imri.

   ^3But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid the
   beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the
   bars thereof.

   ^4And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of
   Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the
   son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Baana.

   ^5And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not
   their necks to the work of their Lord.

   ^6Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and
   Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up
   the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

   ^7And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the
   Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the
   governor on this side the river.

   ^8Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths.
   Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the
   apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.

   ^9And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of the
   half part of Jerusalem.

   ^10And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over
   against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of
   Hashabniah.

   ^11Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahath-moab,
   repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.

   ^12And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of
   the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.

   ^13The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they
   built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars
   thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung gate.

   ^14But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of
   part of Beth-haccerem; he build it, and set up the doors thereof, the
   locks thereof, and the bars thereof.

   ^15But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Col-hozeh,
   the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up
   the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the
   wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the stairs
   that go down from the city of David.

   ^16After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half
   part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David,
   and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty.

   ^17After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him
   repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his part.

   ^18After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the
   ruler of the half part of Keilah.

   ^19And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of
   Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the
   turning of the wall.

   ^20After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other
   piece, from the turning of the wall unto the door of the house of
   Eliashib the high priest.

   ^21After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz another
   piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the
   house of Eliashib.

   ^22And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.

   ^23After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house.
   After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by
   his house.

   ^24After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from the
   house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall, even unto the corner.

   ^25Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and the
   tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the court
   of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.

   ^26Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against
   the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.

   ^27After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the
   great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel.

   ^28From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over
   against his house.

   ^29After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his house.
   After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of
   the east gate.

   ^30After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the
   sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the
   son of Berechiah over against his chamber.

   ^31After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of
   the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and
   to the going up of the corner.

   ^32And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate repaired
   the goldsmiths and the merchants.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the
   wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.

   ^2And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said,
   What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they
   sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones
   out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?

   ^3Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they
   build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

   ^4Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon
   their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity:

   ^5And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
   from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the
   builders.

   ^6So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto the
   half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.

   ^7But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the
   Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls
   of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped,
   then they were very wroth,

   ^8And conspired all of them together to come and to fight against
   Jerusalem, and to hinder it.

   ^9Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against
   them day and night, because of them.

   ^10And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed,
   and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build the wall.

   ^11And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we
   come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to
   cease.

   ^12And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came,
   they said unto us ten times, From all places whence ye shall return
   unto us they will be upon you.

   ^13Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the
   higher places, I even set the people after their families with their
   swords, their spears, and their bows.

   ^14And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the
   rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them:
   remember the Lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for your
   brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.

   ^15And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known unto
   us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned all
   of us to the wall, every one unto his work.

   ^16And it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my
   servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the
   spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers
   were behind all the house of Judah.

   ^17They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with
   those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work,
   and with the other hand held a weapon.

   ^18For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so
   builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me.

   ^19And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of
   the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the
   wall, one far from another.

   ^20In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye
   thither unto us: our God shall fight for us.

   ^21So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from
   the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.

   ^22Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with
   his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a
   guard to us, and labour on the day.

   ^23So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the
   guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving that
   every one put them off for washing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against
   their brethren the Jews.

   ^2For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are many:
   therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live.

   ^3Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands,
   vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.

   ^4There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king's
   tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards.

   ^5Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
   their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our
   daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto
   bondage already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other
   men have our lands and vineyards.

   ^6And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.

   ^7Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the
   rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother.
   And I set a great assembly against them.

   ^8And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our brethren
   the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even sell your
   brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace,
   and found nothing to answer.

   ^9Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the
   fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?

   ^10I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them
   money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury.

   ^11Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their
   vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the the hundredth
   part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye
   exact of them.

   ^12Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of
   them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and took
   an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.

   ^13Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his
   house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even thus
   be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the congregation said, Amen, and
   praised the Lord. And the people did according to this promise.

   ^14Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in
   the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and
   thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my
   brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.

   ^15But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable
   unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty
   shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people:
   but so did not I, because of the fear of God.

   ^16Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we
   any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.

   ^17Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and
   rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that are
   about us.

   ^18Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six choice
   sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of
   all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread of the
   governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.

   ^19Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done
   for this people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Now it came to pass, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the
   Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the
   wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time I
   had not set up the doors upon the gates;)

   ^2That Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet
   together in some one of the villages in the plain of Ono. But they
   thought to do me mischief.

   ^3And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work, so
   that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it,
   and come down to you?

   ^4Yet they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them
   after the same manner.

   ^5Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth time
   with an open letter in his hand;

   ^6Wherein was written, It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu
   saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou
   buildest the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according to these
   words.

   ^7And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem,
   saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shall it be reported to the
   king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take
   counsel together.

   ^8Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou
   sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

   ^9For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened
   from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my
   hands.

   ^10Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the
   son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet together
   in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of
   the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will
   they come to slay thee.

   ^11And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that,
   being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go
   in.

   ^12And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he
   pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired
   him.

   ^13Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin,
   and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might
   reproach me.

   ^14My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these
   their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the
   prophets, that would have put me in fear.

   ^15So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month
   Elul, in fifty and two days.

   ^16And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and
   all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much
   cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was
   wrought of our God.

   ^17Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto
   Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.

   ^18For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son
   in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the
   daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah.

   ^19Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words to
   him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the
   doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,

   ^2That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace,
   charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared God above
   many.

   ^3And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until
   the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and
   bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every
   one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house.

   ^4Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein,
   and the houses were not builded.

   ^5And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and the
   rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I
   found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first,
   and found written therein,

   ^6These are the children of the province, that went up out of the
   captivity, of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the
   king of Babylon had carried away, and came again to Jerusalem and to
   Judah, every one unto his city;

   ^7Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah,
   Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The
   number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;

   ^8The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.

   ^9The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.

   ^10The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two.

   ^11The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two
   thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.

   ^12The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.

   ^13The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five.

   ^14The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.

   ^15The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight.

   ^16The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.

   ^17The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.

   ^18The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven.

   ^19The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven.

   ^20The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five.

   ^21The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.

   ^22The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight.

   ^23The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four.

   ^24The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve.

   ^25The children of Gibeon, ninety and five.

   ^26The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight.

   ^27The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.

   ^28The men of Beth- azmaveth, forty and two.

   ^29The men of Kirjathjearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred
   forty and three.

   ^30The men of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.

   ^31The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two.

   ^32The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twenty and three.

   ^33The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.

   ^34The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and
   four.

   ^35The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

   ^36The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.

   ^37The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one.

   ^38The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.

   ^39The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine
   hundred seventy and three.

   ^40The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.

   ^41The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.

   ^42The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

   ^43The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children
   of Hodevah, seventy and four.

   ^44The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight.

   ^45The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the
   children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the
   children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight.

   ^46The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the
   children of Tabbaoth,

   ^47The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,

   ^48The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of
   Shalmai,

   ^49The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of
   Gahar,

   ^50The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of
   Nekoda,

   ^51The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of
   Phaseah,

   ^52The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of
   Nephishesim,

   ^53The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of
   Harhur,

   ^54The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of
   Harsha,

   ^55The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of
   Tamah,

   ^56The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

   ^57The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the
   children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,

   ^58The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of
   Giddel,

   ^59The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of
   Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon.

   ^60All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were
   three hundred ninety and two.

   ^61And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha,
   Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's house,
   nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.

   ^62The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of
   Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.

   ^63And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz,
   the children of Barzillai, which took one of the daughters of Barzillai
   the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name.

   ^64These sought their register among those that were reckoned by
   genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put
   from the priesthood.

   ^65And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
   most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.

   ^66The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three
   hundred and threescore,

   ^67Beside their manservants and their maidservants, of whom there were
   seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and they had two hundred
   forty and five singing men and singing women.

   ^68Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred
   forty and five:

   ^69Their camels, four hundred thirty and five: six thousand seven
   hundred and twenty asses.

   ^70And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The
   Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons,
   five hundred and thirty priests' garments.

   ^71And some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the
   work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred
   pounds of silver.

   ^72And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand drams
   of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and threescore and seven
   priests' garments.

   ^73So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers,
   and some of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in
   their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children of Israel
   were in their cities.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the
   street that was before the water gate; and they spake unto Ezra the
   scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had
   commanded to Israel.

   ^2And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both of
   men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the
   first day of the seventh month.

   ^3And he read therein before the street that was before the water gate
   from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and those
   that could understand; and the ears of all the people were attentive
   unto the book of the law.

   ^4And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made
   for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and
   Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and
   on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and
   Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam.

   ^5And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people; (for he was
   above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood up:

   ^6And Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God. And all the people
   answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their
   heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground.

   ^7Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai,
   Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the
   Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stood
   in their place.

   ^8So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the
   sense, and caused them to understand the reading.

   ^9And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe,
   and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people, This
   day is holy unto the Lord your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the
   people wept, when they heard the words of the law.

   ^10Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
   sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for
   this day is holy unto our Lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the
   Lord is your strength.

   ^11So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for
   the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.

   ^12And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send
   portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the
   words that were declared unto them.

   ^13And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the
   fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the
   scribe, even to understand the words of the law.

   ^14And they found written in the law which the Lord had commanded by
   Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast
   of the seventh month:

   ^15And that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and
   in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive
   branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches,
   and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.

   ^16So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves
   booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and
   in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate,
   and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.

   ^17And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the
   captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of
   Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done
   so. And there was very great gladness.

   ^18Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in
   the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on
   the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel
   were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them.

   ^2And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and
   stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.

   ^3And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of
   the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part
   they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God.

   ^4Then stood up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani,
   Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with
   a loud voice unto the Lord their God.

   ^5Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah,
   Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless the Lord
   your God for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name, which is
   exalted above all blessing and praise.

   ^6Thou, even thou, art Lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven of
   heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are
   therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them
   all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.

   ^7Thou art the Lord the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him
   forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham;

   ^8And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a covenant
   with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the
   Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites,
   to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou
   art righteous:

   ^9And didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest
   their cry by the Red sea;

   ^10And shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his
   servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knewest that they
   dealt proudly against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as it is
   this day.

   ^11And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through
   the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou
   threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters.

   ^12Moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in the
   night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they
   should go.

   ^13Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from
   heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good statutes
   and commandments:

   ^14And madest known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them
   precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant:

   ^15And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest
   forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and promisedst
   them that they should go in to possess the land which thou hadst sworn
   to give them.

   ^16But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
   and hearkened not to thy commandments,

   ^17And refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou
   didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion
   appointed a captain to return to their bondage: but thou art a God
   ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
   kindness, and forsookest them not.

   ^18Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy
   God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great
   provocations;

   ^19Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the
   wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to
   lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night, to shew them
   light, and the way wherein they should go.

   ^20Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest
   not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.

   ^21Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so that
   they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet
   swelled not.

   ^22Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide
   them into corners: so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of
   the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.

   ^23Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and
   broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to
   their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.

   ^24So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst
   before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest
   them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land,
   that they might do with them as they would.

   ^25And they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses
   full of all goods, wells digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit
   trees in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat,
   and delighted themselves in thy great goodness.

   ^26Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and
   cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets which testified
   against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocations.

   ^27Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who
   vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto
   thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold
   mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of
   their enemies.

   ^28But after they had rest, they did evil again before thee: therefore
   leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the
   dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thee, thou
   heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them
   according to thy mercies;

   ^29And testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them again
   unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy
   commandments, but sinned against thy judgments, (which if a man do, he
   shall live in them;) and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their
   neck, and would not hear.

   ^30Yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them
   by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore
   gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands.

   ^31Nevertheless for thy great mercies' sake thou didst not utterly
   consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful
   God.

   ^32Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God,
   who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little
   before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and
   on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy
   people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.

   ^33Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou hast
   done right, but we have done wickedly:

   ^34Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers,
   kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments and thy testimonies,
   wherewith thou didst testify against them.

   ^35For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great
   goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which
   thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.

   ^36Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gavest
   unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold,
   we are servants in it:

   ^37And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over
   us because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and
   over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.

   ^38And because of all this we make a sure covenant, and write it; and
   our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of
   Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,

   ^2Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,

   ^3Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah,

   ^4Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,

   ^5Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,

   ^6Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,

   ^7Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,

   ^8Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests.

   ^9And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons
   of Henadad, Kadmiel;

   ^10And their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,

   ^11Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,

   ^12Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,

   ^13Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.

   ^14The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,

   ^15Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,

   ^16Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,

   ^17Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,

   ^18Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,

   ^19Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,

   ^20Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,

   ^21Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,

   ^22Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,

   ^23Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,

   ^24Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,

   ^25Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,

   ^26And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,

   ^27Malluch, Harim, Baanah.

   ^28And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters,
   the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves
   from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their
   sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having
   understanding;

   ^29They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a
   curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses
   the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the
   Lord our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes;

   ^30And that we would not give our daughters unto the people of the
   land, nor take their daughters for our sons:

   ^31And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the
   sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath,
   or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the
   exaction of every debt.

   ^32Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the
   third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;

   ^33For the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for the
   continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the
   set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to make
   an atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.

   ^34And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people,
   for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, after the
   houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, to burn upon
   the altar of the Lord our God, as it is written in the law:

   ^35And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits of
   all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the Lord:

   ^36Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written
   in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring
   to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of
   our God:

   ^37And that we should bring the firstfruits of our dough, and our
   offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, of wine and of oil,
   unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the
   tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same Levites might have
   the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.

   ^38And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when the
   Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the
   tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure
   house.

   ^39For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the
   offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the chambers,
   where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister,
   and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake the house of
   our God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people
   also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy
   city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities.

   ^2And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered themselves
   to dwell at Jerusalem.

   ^3Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but
   in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their
   cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the
   Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants.

   ^4And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the
   children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of
   Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of
   Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez;

   ^5And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of
   Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah,
   the son of Shiloni.

   ^6All the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred
   threescore and eight valiant men.

   ^7And these are the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the
   son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of
   Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah.

   ^8And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.

   ^9And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son of
   Senuah was second over the city.

   ^10Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin.

   ^11Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok,
   the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the ruler of the house of
   God.

   ^12And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred
   twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the
   son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of
   Malchiah,

   ^13And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two:
   and Amashai the son of PrAzareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of
   Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,

   ^14And their brethren, mighty men of valour, an hundred twenty and
   eight: and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of one of the great men.

   ^15Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam,
   the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;

   ^16And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the
   oversight of the outward business of the house of God.

   ^17And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph,
   was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah
   the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of
   Galal, the son of Jeduthun.

   ^18All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and
   four.

   ^19Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept
   the gates, were an hundred seventy and two.

   ^20And the residue of Israel, of the priests, and the Levites, were in
   all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.

   ^21But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the
   Nethinims.

   ^22The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of
   Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of
   the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house of
   God.

   ^23For it was the king's commandment concerning them, that a certain
   portion should be for the singers, due for every day.

   ^24And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah the
   son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the
   people.

   ^25And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of
   Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon,
   and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages
   thereof,

   ^26And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Beth-phelet,

   ^27And at Hazarshual, and at Beersheba, and in the villages thereof,

   ^28And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,

   ^29And at En-rimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,

   ^30Zanoah, Adullam, and in their villages, at Lachish, and the fields
   thereof, at Azekah, and in the villages thereof. And they dwelt from
   Beersheba unto the valley of Hinnom.

   ^31The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija,
   and Bethel, and in their villages,

   ^32And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,

   ^33Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,

   ^34Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,

   ^35Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.

   ^36And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with Zerubbabel
   the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,

   ^2Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,

   ^3Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,

   ^4Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah,

   ^5Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,

   ^6Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,

   ^7Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chief of the priests
   and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.

   ^8Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and
   Mattaniah, which was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.

   ^9Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, were over against them in
   the watches.

   ^10And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib
   begat Joiada,

   ^11And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.

   ^12And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers:
   of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;

   ^13Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;

   ^14Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;

   ^15Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;

   ^16Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;

   ^17Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai;

   ^18Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;

   ^19And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;

   ^20Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;

   ^21Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel.

   ^22The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and
   Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
   reign of Darius the Persian.

   ^23The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the book
   of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.

   ^24And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the
   son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and to
   give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward
   over against ward.

   ^25Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were
   porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.

   ^26These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of
   Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the
   priest, the scribe.

   ^27And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
   Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep
   the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with
   singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.

   ^28And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out
   of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of
   Netophathi;

   ^29Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and
   Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages round about
   Jerusalem.

   ^30And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and purified
   the people, and the gates, and the wall.

   ^31Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed
   two great companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one went on the
   right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate:

   ^32And after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah,

   ^33And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,

   ^34Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,

   ^35And certain of the priests' sons with trumpets; namely, Zechariah
   the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son
   of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph:

   ^36And his brethren, Shemaiah, and PrAzarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai,
   Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the
   man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.

   ^37And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went up
   by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall, above
   the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward.

   ^38And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against
   them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from
   beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall;

   ^39And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and
   above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah,
   even unto the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.

   ^40So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of
   God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me:

   ^41And the priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai,
   Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;

   ^42And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan,
   and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with
   Jezrahiah their overseer.

   ^43Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God
   had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the children
   rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.

   ^44And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
   treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
   to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of the
   law for the priests and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the priests and
   for the Levites that waited.

   ^45And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God, and
   the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of David,
   and of Solomon his son.

   ^46For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of the
   singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.

   ^47And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of
   Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
   his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the Levites; and the
   Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the
   people; and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the
   Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever;

   ^2Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with
   water, but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them:
   howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.

   ^3Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated
   from Israel all the mixed multitude.

   ^4And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the
   chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah:

   ^5And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they
   laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the
   tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to
   be given to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the
   offerings of the priests.

   ^6But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and
   thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and
   after certain days obtained I leave of the king:

   ^7And I came to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib did
   for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of
   God.

   ^8And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth all the household
   stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.

   ^9Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither brought
   I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meat offering and the
   frankincense.

   ^10And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given
   them: for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled
   every one to his field.

   ^11Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God
   forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place.

   ^12Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine and
   the oil unto the treasuries.

   ^13And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and
   Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them was
   Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah: for they were counted
   faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their brethren.

   ^14Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good
   deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices
   thereof.

   ^15In those days saw I in Judah some treading winepresses on the
   sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine,
   grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into
   Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day
   wherein they sold victuals.

   ^16There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and all
   manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and
   in Jerusalem.

   ^17Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What
   evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?

   ^18Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil
   upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by
   profaning the sabbath.

   ^19And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be
   dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and
   charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and some
   of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be
   brought in on the sabbath day.

   ^20So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without
   Jerusalem once or twice.

   ^21Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye
   about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that
   time forth came they no more on the sabbath.

   ^22And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and
   that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day.
   Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to
   the greatness of thy mercy.

   ^23In those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of Ashdod, of
   Ammon, and of Moab:

   ^24And their children spake half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not
   speak in the Jews' language, but according to the language of each
   people.

   ^25And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of
   them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying,
   Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
   daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.

   ^26Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many
   nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God
   made him king over all Israel: nevertheless even him did outlandish
   women cause to sin.

   ^27Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
   transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?

   ^28And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest,
   was son in law to Sanballat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from
   me.

   ^29Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood,
   and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.

   ^30Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of
   the priests and the Levites, every one in his business;

   ^31And for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the
   firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Esther
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus which
   reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and seven and
   twenty provinces:)

   ^2That in those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his
   kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,

   ^3In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his princes
   and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes
   of the provinces, being before him:

   ^4When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of
   his excellent majesty many days, even an hundred and fourscore days.

   ^5And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the
   people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and
   small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace;

   ^6Where were white, green, and blue, hangings, fastened with cords of
   fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble: the beds
   were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white,
   and black, marble.

   ^7And they gave them drink in vessels of gold, (the vessels being
   diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, according to
   the state of the king.

   ^8And the drinking was according to the law; none did compel: for so
   the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they
   should do according to every man's pleasure.

   ^9Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house
   which belonged to king Ahasuerus.

   ^10On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine,
   he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and
   Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus
   the king,

   ^11To bring Vashti the queen before the king with the crown royal, to
   shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to look
   on.

   ^12But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by
   his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger
   burned in him.

   ^13Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so
   was the king's manner toward all that knew law and judgment:

   ^14And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish,
   Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media,
   which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)

   ^15What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law, because she
   hath not performed the commandment of the king Ahasuerus by the
   chamberlains?

   ^16And Memucan answered before the king and the princes, Vashti the
   queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the
   princes, and to all the people that are in all the provinces of the
   king Ahasuerus.

   ^17For this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so that
   they shall despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shall be
   reported, The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought
   in before him, but she came not.

   ^18Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all
   the king's princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen. Thus
   shall there arise too much contempt and wrath.

   ^19If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him,
   and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes,
   that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus;
   and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is better than
   she.

   ^20And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published
   throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give
   to their husbands honour, both to great and small.

   ^21And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did
   according to the word of Memucan:

   ^22For he sent letters into all the king's provinces, into every
   province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after
   their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and
   that it should be published according to the language of every people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he
   remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against
   her.

   ^2Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, Let there be
   fair young virgins sought for the king:

   ^3And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his
   kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins unto
   Shushan the palace, to the house of the women unto the custody of Hege
   the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for
   purification be given them:

   ^4And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of
   Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.

   ^5Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was
   Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a
   Benjamite;

   ^6Who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity which had
   been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the
   king of Babylon had carried away.

   ^7And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter:
   for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and
   beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took
   for his own daughter.

   ^8So it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was
   heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the
   palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the
   king's house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.

   ^9And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and he
   speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as
   belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her,
   out of the king's house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the
   best place of the house of the women.

   ^10Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai had
   charged her that she should not shew it.

   ^11And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house,
   to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.

   ^12Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus,
   after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the
   women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to
   wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours,
   and with other things for the purifying of the women;)

   ^13Then thus came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired
   was given her to go with her out of the house of the women unto the
   king's house.

   ^14In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the
   second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's
   chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no
   more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by
   name.

   ^15Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of
   Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto
   the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain,
   the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the
   sight of all them that looked upon her.

   ^16So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the
   tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his
   reign.

   ^17And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained
   grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he set
   the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti.

   ^18Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his
   servants, even Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces,
   and gave gifts, according to the state of the king.

   ^19And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
   Mordecai sat in the king's gate.

   ^20Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai
   had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as
   when she was brought up with him.

   ^21In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the
   king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door,
   were wroth, and sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.

   ^22And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the
   queen; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name.

   ^23And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out;
   therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the
   book of the chronicles before the king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
   Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all
   the princes that were with him.

   ^2And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and
   reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But
   Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.

   ^3Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto
   Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king's commandment?

   ^4Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened
   not unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters
   would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew.

   ^5And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence,
   then was Haman full of wrath.

   ^6And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had
   shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy
   all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even
   the people of Mordecai.

   ^7In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of
   king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day
   to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is, the
   month Adar.

   ^8And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people
   scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of
   thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people; neither keep
   they the king's laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit to
   suffer them.

   ^9If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed:
   and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those
   that have the charge of the business, to bring it into the king's
   treasuries.

   ^10And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the
   son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.

   ^11And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thee, the
   people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee.

   ^12Then were the king's scribes called on the thirteenth day of the
   first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had
   commanded unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were
   over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every
   province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after
   their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and
   sealed with the king's ring.

   ^13And the letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces, to
   destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old,
   little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of
   the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of
   them for a prey.

   ^14The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
   province was published unto all people, that they should be ready
   against that day.

   ^15The posts went out, being hastened by the king's commandment, and
   the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat
   down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes,
   and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the
   city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry;

   ^2And came even before the king's gate: for none might enter into the
   king's gate clothed with sackcloth.

   ^3And in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and his
   decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and
   weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

   ^4So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then was
   the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai,
   and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it not.

   ^5Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains, whom
   he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment to
   Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was.

   ^6So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city, which
   was before the king's gate.

   ^7And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of the
   sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's
   treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them.

   ^8Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given
   at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to declare it
   unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to
   make supplication unto him, and to make request before him for her
   people.

   ^9And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.

   ^10Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto
   Mordecai;

   ^11All the king's servants, and the people of the king's provinces, do
   know, that whosoever, whether man or woman, shall come unto the king
   into the inner court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put
   him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden
   sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been called to come in unto
   the king these thirty days.

   ^12And they told to Mordecai Esther's words.

   ^13Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself
   that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the Jews.

   ^14For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall
   there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place;
   but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth
   whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?

   ^15Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer,

   ^16Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and
   fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I
   also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the
   king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish.

   ^17So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had
   commanded him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal
   apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over against
   the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal
   house, over against the gate of the house.

   ^2And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the
   court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to
   Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near,
   and touched the top of the sceptre.

   ^3Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and what
   is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom.

   ^4And Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king and
   Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him.

   ^5Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as
   Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther
   had prepared.

   ^6And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy
   petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even
   to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.

   ^7Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is;

   ^8If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the
   king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and
   Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do
   to morrow as the king hath said.

   ^9Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but when
   Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up, nor moved
   for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai.

   ^10Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent
   and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife.

   ^11And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of
   his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him, and
   how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king.

   ^12Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in
   with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to
   morrow am I invited unto her also with the king.

   ^13Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew
   sitting at the king's gate.

   ^14Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a
   gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the
   king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily with
   the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused
   the gallows to be made.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the
   book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king.

   ^2And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and
   Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who
   sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.

   ^3And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai
   for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, There
   is nothing done for him.

   ^4And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into the
   outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang
   Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.

   ^5And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the
   court. And the king said, Let him come in.

   ^6So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto
   the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in his
   heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself?

   ^7And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to
   honour,

   ^8Let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear, and
   the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set
   upon his head:

   ^9And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the
   king's most noble princes, that they may array the man withal whom the
   king delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the
   street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to
   the man whom the king delighteth to honour.

   ^10Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and
   the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that
   sitteth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast
   spoken.

   ^11Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and
   brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaimed
   before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth
   to honour.

   ^12And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to his
   house mourning, and having his head covered.

   ^13And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing that
   had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him,
   If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to
   fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before
   him.

   ^14And while they were yet talking with him, came the king's
   chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther
   had prepared.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.

   ^2And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the banquet
   of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be granted
   thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the
   half of the kingdom.

   ^3Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in
   thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me
   at my petition, and my people at my request:

   ^4For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and
   to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had
   held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king's
   damage.

   ^5Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen, Who
   is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?

   ^6And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then
   Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.

   ^7And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went into
   the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his life to
   Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined against him
   by the king.

   ^8Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the
   banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther was.
   Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the
   house? As the word went out of the king's mouth, they covered Haman's
   face.

   ^9And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold
   also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai,
   who had spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then
   the king said, Hang him thereon.

   ^10So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
   Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews'
   enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king; for
   Esther had told what he was unto her.

   ^2And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and
   gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.

   ^3And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his
   feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the
   Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews.

   ^4Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther
   arose, and stood before the king,

   ^5And said, If it please the king, and if I have found favour in his
   sight, and the thing seem right before the king, and I be pleasing in
   his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the
   son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which
   are in all the king's provinces:

   ^6For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people?
   or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?

   ^7Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai
   the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they
   have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.

   ^8Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name, and
   seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is written in the
   king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.

   ^9Then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third month,
   that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day thereof; and
   it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded unto the Jews,
   and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces
   which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven
   provinces, unto every province according to the writing thereof, and
   unto every people after their language, and to the Jews according to
   their writing, and according to their language.

   ^10And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the
   king's ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on
   mules, camels, and young dromedaries:

   ^11Wherein the king granted the Jews which were in every city to gather
   themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay,
   and to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province that
   would assault them, both little ones and women, and to take the spoil
   of them for a prey,

   ^12Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon
   the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.

   ^13The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
   province was published unto all people, and that the Jews should be
   ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.

   ^14So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being
   hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. And the decree was
   given at Shushan the palace.

   ^15And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal apparel
   of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment
   of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and was
   glad.

   ^16The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour.

   ^17And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the king's
   commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness, a feast
   and a good day. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the
   fear of the Jews fell upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth
   day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near
   to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped
   to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that
   the Jews had rule over them that hated them;)

   ^2The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all
   the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought
   their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell
   upon all people.

   ^3And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the
   deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear
   of Mordecai fell upon them.

   ^4For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went out
   throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and
   greater.

   ^5Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword,
   and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that
   hated them.

   ^6And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred
   men.

   ^7And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,

   ^8And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,

   ^9And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,

   ^10The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews,
   slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.

   ^11On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the
   palace was brought before the king.

   ^12And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and
   destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of
   Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now
   what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy
   request further? and it shall be done.

   ^13Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the
   Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this
   day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.

   ^14And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given at
   Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons.

   ^15For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on
   the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men
   at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand.

   ^16But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered
   themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their
   enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they
   laid not their hands on the prey,

   ^17On the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day
   of the same rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.

   ^18But the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the
   thirteenth day thereof; and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the
   fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting
   and gladness.

   ^19Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled
   towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and
   feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.

   ^20And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews
   that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and
   far,

   ^21To stablish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth
   day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,

   ^22As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the
   month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning
   into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy,
   and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.

   ^23And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had
   written unto them;

   ^24Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all
   the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast
   Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them;

   ^25But when Esther came before the king, he commanded by letters that
   his wicked device, which he devised against the Jews, should return
   upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the
   gallows.

   ^26Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur.
   Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had
   seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them,

   ^27The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon
   all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that
   they would keep these two days according to their writing, and
   according to their appointed time every year;

   ^28And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every
   generation, every family, every province, and every city; and that
   these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the
   memorial of them perish from their seed.

   ^29Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the
   Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim.

   ^30And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty and
   seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and
   truth,

   ^31To confirm these days of Purim in their times appointed, according
   as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they
   had decreed for themselves and for their seed, the matters of the
   fastings and their cry.

   ^32And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it
   was written in the book.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles
   of the sea.

   ^2And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration
   of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they
   not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and
   Persia?

   ^3For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among
   the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the
   wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Job
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was
   perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.

   ^2And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.

   ^3His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
   camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
   a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the
   men of the east.

   ^4And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day; and
   sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.

   ^5And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
   Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and
   offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for Job
   said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
   hearts. Thus did Job continually.

   ^6Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
   before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.

   ^7And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered
   the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from
   walking up and down in it.

   ^8And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
   that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man,
   one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?

   ^9Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought?

   ^10Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and
   about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his
   hands, and his substance is increased in the land.

   ^11But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he
   will curse thee to thy face.

   ^12And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy
   power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth
   from the presence of the Lord.

   ^13And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and
   drinking wine in their eldest brother's house:

   ^14And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were
   plowing, and the asses feeding beside them:

   ^15And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have
   slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped
   alone to tell thee.

   ^16While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
   fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
   the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell
   thee.

   ^17While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
   Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have
   carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
   sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

   ^18While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy
   sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
   brother's house:

   ^19And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote
   the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they
   are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

   ^20Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
   down upon the ground, and worshipped,

   ^21And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I
   return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be
   the name of the Lord.

   ^22In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves
   before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself
   before the Lord.

   ^2And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan
   answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and
   from walking up and down in it.

   ^3And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
   that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man,
   one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his
   integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without
   cause.

   ^4And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a
   man hath will he give for his life.

   ^5But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and
   he will curse thee to thy face.

   ^6And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save
   his life.

   ^7So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
   sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.

   ^8And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down
   among the ashes.

   ^9Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity?
   curse God, and die.

   ^10But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women
   speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
   not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.

   ^11Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come
   upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite,
   and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an
   appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him.

   ^12And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they
   lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle,
   and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.

   ^13So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
   nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was
   very great.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.

   ^2And Job spake, and said,

   ^3Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was
   said, There is a man child conceived.

   ^4Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither
   let the light shine upon it.

   ^5Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon
   it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.

   ^6As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be joined
   unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the
   months.

   ^7Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.

   ^8Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their
   mourning.

   ^9Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light,
   but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day:

   ^10Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow
   from mine eyes.

   ^11Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I
   came out of the belly?

   ^12Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck?

   ^13For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have
   slept: then had I been at rest,

   ^14With kings and counsellors of the earth, which built desolate places
   for themselves;

   ^15Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:

   ^16Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants which
   never saw light.

   ^17There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at
   rest.

   ^18There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
   oppressor.

   ^19The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
   master.

   ^20Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the
   bitter in soul;

   ^21Which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than
   for hid treasures;

   ^22Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the
   grave?

   ^23Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath
   hedged in?

   ^24For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured out
   like the waters.

   ^25For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which
   I was afraid of is come unto me.

   ^26I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet
   trouble came.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,

   ^2If we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can
   withhold himself from speaking?

   ^3Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the
   weak hands.

   ^4Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast
   strengthened the feeble knees.

   ^5But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee,
   and thou art troubled.

   ^6Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness
   of thy ways?

   ^7Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? or where
   were the righteous cut off?

   ^8Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness,
   reap the same.

   ^9By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils
   are they consumed.

   ^10The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the
   teeth of the young lions, are broken.

   ^11The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's whelps
   are scattered abroad.

   ^12Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a
   little thereof.

   ^13In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth
   on men,

   ^14Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.

   ^15Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up:

   ^16It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image
   was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,

   ^17Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure
   than his maker?

   ^18Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged
   with folly:

   ^19How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation
   is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?

   ^20They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever
   without any regarding it.

   ^21Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die, even
   without wisdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the
   saints wilt thou turn?

   ^2For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one.

   ^3I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his
   habitation.

   ^4His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate,
   neither is there any to deliver them.

   ^5Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the
   thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance.

   ^6Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth
   trouble spring out of the ground;

   ^7Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.

   ^8I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause:

   ^9Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without
   number:

   ^10Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the fields:

   ^11To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be
   exalted to safety.

   ^12He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
   cannot perform their enterprise.

   ^13He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the
   froward is carried headlong.

   ^14They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as
   in the night.

   ^15But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
   the hand of the mighty.

   ^16So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.

   ^17Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not
   thou the chastening of the Almighty:

   ^18For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make
   whole.

   ^19He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall no
   evil touch thee.

   ^20In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the power
   of the sword.

   ^21Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt thou
   be afraid of destruction when it cometh.

   ^22At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be
   afraid of the beasts of the earth.

   ^23For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the
   beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.

   ^24And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou
   shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin.

   ^25Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
   offspring as the grass of the earth.

   ^26Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
   cometh in in his season.

   ^27Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
   for thy good.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   But Job answered and said,

   ^2O that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
   balances together!

   ^3For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my
   words are swallowed up.

   ^4For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
   drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array
   against me.

   ^5Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his
   fodder?

   ^6Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there any
   taste in the white of an egg?

   ^7The things that my soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat.

   ^8Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the
   thing that I long for!

   ^9Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose
   his hand, and cut me off!

   ^10Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in
   sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the
   Holy One.

   ^11What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that
   I should prolong my life?

   ^12Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?

   ^13Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?

   ^14To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend; but
   he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.

   ^15My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of
   brooks they pass away;

   ^16Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is
   hid:

   ^17What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are
   consumed out of their place.

   ^18The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and
   perish.

   ^19The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.

   ^20They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and
   were ashamed.

   ^21For now ye are no thing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.

   ^22Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your
   substance?

   ^23Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of
   the mighty?

   ^24Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand
   wherein I have erred.

   ^25How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove?

   ^26Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
   desperate, which are as wind?

   ^27Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend.

   ^28Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto you
   if I lie.

   ^29Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
   righteousness is in it.

   ^30Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
   things?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also
   like the days of an hireling?

   ^2As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling
   looketh for the reward of his work:

   ^3So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are
   appointed to me.

   ^4When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone?
   and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.

   ^5My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken,
   and become loathsome.

   ^6My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without
   hope.

   ^7O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good.

   ^8The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes are
   upon me, and I am not.

   ^9As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to
   the grave shall come up no more.

   ^10He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know
   him any more.

   ^11Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish
   of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.

   ^12Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?

   ^13When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
   complaint;

   ^14Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions:

   ^15So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than my life.

   ^16I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days are
   vanity.

   ^17What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
   shouldest set thine heart upon him?

   ^18And that thou shouldest visit him every morning, and try him every
   moment?

   ^19How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I
   swallow down my spittle?

   ^20I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?
   why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to
   myself?

   ^21And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine
   iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in
   the morning, but I shall not be.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

   ^2How long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shall the words
   of thy mouth be like a strong wind?

   ^3Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice?

   ^4If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away
   for their transgression;

   ^5If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to
   the Almighty;

   ^6If thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee,
   and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

   ^7Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
   increase.

   ^8For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to
   the search of their fathers:

   ^9(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon
   earth are a shadow:)

   ^10Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of
   their heart?

   ^11Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?

   ^12Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withereth
   before any other herb.

   ^13So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope
   shall perish:

   ^14Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider's
   web.

   ^15He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold
   it fast, but it shall not endure.

   ^16He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
   garden.

   ^17His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of stones.

   ^18If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I
   have not seen thee.

   ^19Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
   others grow.

   ^20Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help
   the evil doers:

   ^21Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.

   ^22They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
   place of the wicked shall come to nought.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Then Job answered and said,

   ^2I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?

   ^3If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.

   ^4He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
   himself against him, and hath prospered?

   ^5Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth
   them in his anger.

   ^6Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
   tremble.

   ^7Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
   stars.

   ^8Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of
   the sea.

   ^9Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
   south.

   ^10Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without
   number.

   ^11Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I
   perceive him not.

   ^12Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him,
   What doest thou?

   ^13If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under
   him.

   ^14How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason
   with him?

   ^15Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would
   make supplication to my judge.

   ^16If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe
   that he had hearkened unto my voice.

   ^17For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without
   cause.

   ^18He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with
   bitterness.

   ^19If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who
   shall set me a time to plead?

   ^20If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am
   perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.

   ^21Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise
   my life.

   ^22This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect
   and the wicked.

   ^23If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
   innocent.

   ^24The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the
   faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?

   ^25Now my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no
   good.

   ^26They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hasteth
   to the prey.

   ^27If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness,
   and comfort myself:

   ^28I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou wilt not hold me
   innocent.

   ^29If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain?

   ^30If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean;

   ^31Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall
   abhor me.

   ^32For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we
   should come together in judgment.

   ^33Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand
   upon us both.

   ^34Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me:

   ^35Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I
   will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

   ^2I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou
   contendest with me.

   ^3Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest
   despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the
   wicked?

   ^4Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth?

   ^5Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's days,

   ^6That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?

   ^7Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver
   out of thine hand.

   ^8Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet
   thou dost destroy me.

   ^9Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and
   wilt thou bring me into dust again?

   ^10Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?

   ^11Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with
   bones and sinews.

   ^12Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath
   preserved my spirit.

   ^13And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is
   with thee.

   ^14If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from
   mine iniquity.

   ^15If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not
   lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine
   affliction;

   ^16For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou
   shewest thyself marvellous upon me.

   ^17Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine
   indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.

   ^18Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I
   had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!

   ^19I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been
   carried from the womb to the grave.

   ^20Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take
   comfort a little,

   ^21Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness
   and the shadow of death;

   ^22A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death,
   without any order, and where the light is as darkness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,

   ^2Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full
   of talk be justified?

   ^3Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest,
   shall no man make thee ashamed?

   ^4For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine
   eyes.

   ^5But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee;

   ^6And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are
   double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less
   than thine iniquity deserveth.

   ^7Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the
   Almighty unto perfection?

   ^8It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell; what
   canst thou know?

   ^9The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the
   sea.

   ^10If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder
   him?

   ^11For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also; will he not then
   consider it?

   ^12For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild ass's
   colt.

   ^13If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him;

   ^14If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
   wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.

   ^15For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt
   be stedfast, and shalt not fear:

   ^16Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that
   pass away:

   ^17And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine
   forth, thou shalt be as the morning.

   ^18And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt dig
   about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety.

   ^19Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many
   shall make suit unto thee.

   ^20But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape,
   and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And Job answered and said,

   ^2No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.

   ^3But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you:
   yea, who knoweth not such things as these?

   ^4I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he
   answereth him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn.

   ^5He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in the
   thought of him that is at ease.

   ^6The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
   secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly.

   ^7But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of
   the air, and they shall tell thee:

   ^8Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the
   sea shall declare unto thee.

   ^9Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the Lord hath wrought
   this?

   ^10In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of
   all mankind.

   ^11Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?

   ^12With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding.

   ^13With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding.

   ^14Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he shutteth
   up a man, and there can be no opening.

   ^15Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sendeth
   them out, and they overturn the earth.

   ^16With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are
   his.

   ^17He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges fools.

   ^18He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.

   ^19He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty.

   ^20He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the
   understanding of the aged.

   ^21He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the
   mighty.

   ^22He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to
   light the shadow of death.

   ^23He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the
   nations, and straiteneth them again.

   ^24He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth,
   and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.

   ^25They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to stagger
   like a drunken man.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and understood it.

   ^2What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto you.

   ^3Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
   God.

   ^4But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.

   ^5Oh that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your
   wisdom.

   ^6Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.

   ^7Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?

   ^8Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?

   ^9Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh
   another, do ye so mock him?

   ^10He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons.

   ^11Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon
   you?

   ^12Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of
   clay.

   ^13Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me
   what will.

   ^14Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine
   hand?

   ^15Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine
   own ways before him.

   ^16He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come
   before him.

   ^17Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears.

   ^18Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be
   justified.

   ^19Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I
   shall give up the ghost.

   ^20Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide myself from
   thee.

   ^21Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me
   afraid.

   ^22Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou
   me.

   ^23How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
   transgression and my sin.

   ^24Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?

   ^25Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue the
   dry stubble?

   ^26For thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possess
   the iniquities of my youth.

   ^27Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly unto
   all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet.

   ^28And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth
   eaten.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.

   ^2He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a
   shadow, and continueth not.

   ^3And dost thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into
   judgment with thee?

   ^4Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.

   ^5Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
   thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass;

   ^6Turn from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an
   hireling, his day.

   ^7For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout
   again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.

   ^8Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof
   die in the ground;

   ^9Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs
   like a plant.

   ^10But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and
   where is he?

   ^11As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth
   up:

   ^12So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens be no more, they
   shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.

   ^13Oh that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep
   me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set
   time, and remember me!

   ^14If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time
   will I wait, till my change come.

   ^15Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to
   the work of thine hands.

   ^16For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin?

   ^17My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine
   iniquity.

   ^18And surely the mountain falling cometh to nought, and the rock is
   removed out of his place.

   ^19The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow
   out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man.

   ^20Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest
   his countenance, and sendest him away.

   ^21His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought
   low, but he perceiveth it not of them.

   ^22But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
   shall mourn.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said,

   ^2Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the
   east wind?

   ^3Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith
   he can do no good?

   ^4Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.

   ^5For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the tongue
   of the crafty.

   ^6Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips
   testify against thee.

   ^7Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the
   hills?

   ^8Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain wisdom to
   thyself?

   ^9What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which
   is not in us?

   ^10With us are both the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than
   thy father.

   ^11Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret
   thing with thee?

   ^12Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what do thy eyes wink at,

   ^13That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and lettest such words go
   out of thy mouth?

   ^14What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a
   woman, that he should be righteous?

   ^15Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not
   clean in his sight.

   ^16How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity
   like water?

   ^17I will shew thee, hear me; and that which I have seen I will
   declare;

   ^18Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it:

   ^19Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among
   them.

   ^20The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number of
   years is hidden to the oppressor.

   ^21A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall
   come upon him.

   ^22He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is
   waited for of the sword.

   ^23He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth that
   the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

   ^24Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
   against him, as a king ready to the battle.

   ^25For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth
   himself against the Almighty.

   ^26He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
   bucklers:

   ^27Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and maketh collops of
   fat on his flanks.

   ^28And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man
   inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.

   ^29He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither
   shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.

   ^30He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his
   branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.

   ^31Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall be
   his recompence.

   ^32It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not
   be green.

   ^33He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off
   his flower as the olive.

   ^34For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall
   consume the tabernacles of bribery.

   ^35They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
   prepareth deceit.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Then Job answered and said,

   ^2I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.

   ^3Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou
   answerest?

   ^4I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my soul's stead, I
   could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.

   ^5But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips
   should asswage your grief.

   ^6Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear, what
   am I eased?

   ^7But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate all my
   company.

   ^8And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me:
   and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face.

   ^9He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me with
   his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.

   ^10They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon
   the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together against
   me.

   ^11God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the
   hands of the wicked.

   ^12I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken me
   by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.

   ^13His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder,
   and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground.

   ^14He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like a
   giant.

   ^15I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the
   dust.

   ^16My face is foul with weeping, and my eyelids is the shadow of death;

   ^17Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is pure.

   ^18O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.

   ^19Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.

   ^20My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God.

   ^21Oh that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleadeth for
   his neighbour!

   ^22When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall
   not return.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.

   ^2Are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in
   their provocation?

   ^3Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will
   strike hands with me?

   ^4For thou hast hid their heart from understanding: therefore shalt
   thou not exalt them.

   ^5He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
   children shall fail.

   ^6He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetime I was as a
   tabret.

   ^7Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a
   shadow.

   ^8Upright men shall be astonied at this, and the innocent shall stir up
   himself against the hypocrite.

   ^9The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean
   hands shall be stronger and stronger.

   ^10But as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot find
   one wise man among you.

   ^11My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of
   my heart.

   ^12They change the night into day: the light is short because of
   darkness.

   ^13If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the
   darkness.

   ^14I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art
   my mother, and my sister.

   ^15And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?

   ^16They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is
   in the dust.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

   ^2How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards
   we will speak.

   ^3Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight?

   ^4He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for
   thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?

   ^5Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his
   fire shall not shine.

   ^6The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be
   put out with him.

   ^7The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel
   shall cast him down.

   ^8For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon a
   snare.

   ^9The gin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail
   against him.

   ^10The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the
   way.

   ^11Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to
   his feet.

   ^12His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready
   at his side.

   ^13It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of
   death shall devour his strength.

   ^14His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall
   bring him to the king of terrors.

   ^15It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his:
   brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.

   ^16His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be
   cut off.

   ^17His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no
   name in the street.

   ^18He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the
   world.

   ^19He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any
   remaining in his dwellings.

   ^20They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they that
   went before were affrighted.

   ^21Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place
   of him that knoweth not God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   Then Job answered and said,

   ^2How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?

   ^3These ten times have ye reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye
   make yourselves strange to me.

   ^4And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.

   ^5If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me
   my reproach:

   ^6Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compassed me with his
   net.

   ^7Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but
   there is no judgment.

   ^8He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness
   in my paths.

   ^9He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.

   ^10He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope
   hath he removed like a tree.

   ^11He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me unto
   him as one of his enemies.

   ^12His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and
   encamp round about my tabernacle.

   ^13He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are
   verily estranged from me.

   ^14My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.

   ^15They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a
   stranger: I am an alien in their sight.

   ^16I called my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreated him with
   my mouth.

   ^17My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the
   children's sake of mine own body.

   ^18Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against me.

   ^19All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned
   against me.

   ^20My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with
   the skin of my teeth.

   ^21Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand
   of God hath touched me.

   ^22Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?

   ^23Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a
   book!

   ^24That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for
   ever!

   ^25For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the
   latter day upon the earth:

   ^26And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
   shall I see God:

   ^27Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
   another; though my reins be consumed within me.

   ^28But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the
   matter is found in me?

   ^29Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the
   sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,

   ^2Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make
   haste.

   ^3I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my
   understanding causeth me to answer.

   ^4Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth,

   ^5That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
   hypocrite but for a moment?

   ^6Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach
   unto the clouds;

   ^7Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen
   him shall say, Where is he?

   ^8He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found: yea, he shall
   be chased away as a vision of the night.

   ^9The eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall his
   place any more behold him.

   ^10His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall
   restore their goods.

   ^11His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
   with him in the dust.

   ^12Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his
   tongue;

   ^13Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still within his
   mouth:

   ^14Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within
   him.

   ^15He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God
   shall cast them out of his belly.

   ^16He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper's tongue shall slay him.

   ^17He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and
   butter.

   ^18That which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not swallow
   it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he
   shall not rejoice therein.

   ^19Because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor; because he
   hath violently taken away an house which he builded not;

   ^20Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save
   of that which he desired.

   ^21There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man look
   for his goods.

   ^22In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every hand
   of the wicked shall come upon him.

   ^23When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his
   wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.

   ^24He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
   strike him through.

   ^25It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering sword
   cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon him.

   ^26All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown
   shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his
   tabernacle.

   ^27The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up
   against him.

   ^28The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow
   away in the day of his wrath.

   ^29This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage
   appointed unto him by God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   But Job answered and said,

   ^2Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.

   ^3Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on.

   ^4As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not
   my spirit be troubled?

   ^5Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.

   ^6Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my
   flesh.

   ^7Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?

   ^8Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their
   offspring before their eyes.

   ^9Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.

   ^10Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and
   casteth not her calf.

   ^11They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children
   dance.

   ^12They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
   organ.

   ^13They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the
   grave.

   ^14Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the
   knowledge of thy ways.

   ^15What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit
   should we have, if we pray unto him?

   ^16Lo, their good is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is
   far from me.

   ^17How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh
   their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.

   ^18They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm
   carrieth away.

   ^19God layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him, and
   he shall know it.

   ^20His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath
   of the Almighty.

   ^21For what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the number of
   his months is cut off in the midst?

   ^22Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are
   high.

   ^23One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.

   ^24His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with
   marrow.

   ^25And another dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and never eateth
   with pleasure.

   ^26They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
   them.

   ^27Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully
   imagine against me.

   ^28For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the
   dwelling places of the wicked?

   ^29Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their
   tokens,

   ^30That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they shall be
   brought forth to the day of wrath.

   ^31Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what
   he hath done?

   ^32Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb.

   ^33The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall
   draw after him, as there are innumerable before him.

   ^34How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there
   remaineth falsehood?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,

   ^2Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be
   profitable unto himself?

   ^3Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it
   gain to him that thou makest thy ways perfect?

   ^4Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into
   judgment?

   ^5Is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?

   ^6For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought, and
   stripped the naked of their clothing.

   ^7Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast
   withholden bread from the hungry.

   ^8But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable man
   dwelt in it.

   ^9Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have
   been broken.

   ^10Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth
   thee;

   ^11Or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abundance of waters cover
   thee.

   ^12Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
   stars, how high they are!

   ^13And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark
   cloud?

   ^14Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he seeth not; and he
   walketh in the circuit of heaven.

   ^15Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?

   ^16Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with
   a flood:

   ^17Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do
   for them?

   ^18Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the
   wicked is far from me.

   ^19The righteous see it, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them to
   scorn.

   ^20Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the
   fire consumeth.

   ^21Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall
   come unto thee.

   ^22Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words
   in thine heart.

   ^23If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou shalt
   put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.

   ^24Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the
   stones of the brooks.

   ^25Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have plenty
   of silver.

   ^26For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift
   up thy face unto God.

   ^27Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
   thou shalt pay thy vows.

   ^28Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
   thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

   ^29When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is lifting up;
   and he shall save the humble person.

   ^30He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered by
   the pureness of thine hands.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   Then Job answered and said,

   ^2Even to day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heavier than my
   groaning.

   ^3Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his
   seat!

   ^4I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.

   ^5I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what
   he would say unto me.

   ^6Will he plead against me with his great power? No; but he would put
   strength in me.

   ^7There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered
   for ever from my judge.

   ^8Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot
   perceive him:

   ^9On the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot behold him: he
   hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him:

   ^10But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall
   come forth as gold.

   ^11My foot hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined.

   ^12Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips; I have
   esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.

   ^13But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul
   desireth, even that he doeth.

   ^14For he performeth the thing that is appointed for me: and many such
   things are with him.

   ^15Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am
   afraid of him.

   ^16For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me:

   ^17Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither hath he
   covered the darkness from my face.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know
   him not see his days?

   ^2Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed
   thereof.

   ^3They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's ox
   for a pledge.

   ^4They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide
   themselves together.

   ^5Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work;
   rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yieldeth food for them and
   for their children.

   ^6They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the
   vintage of the wicked.

   ^7They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no
   covering in the cold.

   ^8They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock
   for want of a shelter.

   ^9They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the
   poor.

   ^10They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the
   sheaf from the hungry;

   ^11Which make oil within their walls, and tread their winepresses, and
   suffer thirst.

   ^12Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded crieth
   out: yet God layeth not folly to them.

   ^13They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the
   ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.

   ^14The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy, and
   in the night is as a thief.

   ^15The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No
   eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.

   ^16In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for
   themselves in the daytime: they know not the light.

   ^17For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know
   them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.

   ^18He is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth: he
   beholdeth not the way of the vineyards.

   ^19Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so doth the grave those
   which have sinned.

   ^20The womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetly on him; he
   shall be no more remembered; and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.

   ^21He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not good
   to the widow.

   ^22He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, and no man
   is sure of life.

   ^23Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet his
   eyes are upon their ways.

   ^24They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought low;
   they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of
   the ears of corn.

   ^25And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
   nothing worth?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

   ^2Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high places.

   ^3Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his light
   arise?

   ^4How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that
   is born of a woman?

   ^5Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not
   pure in his sight.

   ^6How much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a
   worm?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   But Job answered and said,

   ^2How hast thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the
   arm that hath no strength?

   ^3How hast thou counseled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast thou
   plentifully declared the thing as it is?

   ^4To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?

   ^5Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants
   thereof.

   ^6Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.

   ^7He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the
   earth upon nothing.

   ^8He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not
   rent under them.

   ^9He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon
   it.

   ^10He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night
   come to an end.

   ^11The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof.

   ^12He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
   smiteth through the proud.

   ^13By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed
   the crooked serpent.

   ^14Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard
   of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,

   ^2As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who
   hath vexed my soul;

   ^3All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my
   nostrils;

   ^4My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.

   ^5God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove
   mine integrity from me.

   ^6My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall
   not reproach me so long as I live.

   ^7Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as
   the unrighteous.

   ^8For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when
   God taketh away his soul?

   ^9Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?

   ^10Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon
   God?

   ^11I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the Almighty
   will I not conceal.

   ^12Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus
   altogether vain?

   ^13This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of
   oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty.

   ^14If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his
   offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.

   ^15Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his widows
   shall not weep.

   ^16Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the
   clay;

   ^17He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent
   shall divide the silver.

   ^18He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper
   maketh.

   ^19The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he
   openeth his eyes, and he is not.

   ^20Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away in
   the night.

   ^21The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm
   hurleth him out of his place.

   ^22For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out
   of his hand.

   ^23Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his
   place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they
   fine it.

   ^2Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.

   ^3He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection: the
   stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.

   ^4The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgotten
   of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men.

   ^5As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned up
   as it were fire.

   ^6The stones of it are the place of sapphires: and it hath dust of
   gold.

   ^7There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture's eye
   hath not seen:

   ^8The lion's whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by
   it.

   ^9He putteth forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains
   by the roots.

   ^10He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye seeth every
   precious thing.

   ^11He bindeth the floods from overflowing; and the thing that is hid
   bringeth he forth to light.

   ^12But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of
   understanding?

   ^13Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land
   of the living.

   ^14The depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not with
   me.

   ^15It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for
   the price thereof.

   ^16It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx,
   or the sapphire.

   ^17The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it
   shall not be for jewels of fine gold.

   ^18No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of
   wisdom is above rubies.

   ^19The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued
   with pure gold.

   ^20Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding?

   ^21Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from
   the fowls of the air.

   ^22Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our
   ears.

   ^23God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof.

   ^24For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole
   heaven;

   ^25To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth the waters by
   measure.

   ^26When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of
   the thunder:

   ^27Then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared it, yea, and
   searched it out.

   ^28And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom;
   and to depart from evil is understanding.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,

   ^2Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved
   me;

   ^3When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked
   through darkness;

   ^4As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my
   tabernacle;

   ^5When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me;

   ^6When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers
   of oil;

   ^7When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat
   in the street!

   ^8The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and
   stood up.

   ^9The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.

   ^10The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of
   their mouth.

   ^11When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me,
   it gave witness to me:

   ^12Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him
   that had none to help him.

   ^13The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I
   caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.

   ^14I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe
   and a diadem.

   ^15I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.

   ^16I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I
   searched out.

   ^17And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
   teeth.

   ^18Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as
   the sand.

   ^19My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon
   my branch.

   ^20My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.

   ^21Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel.

   ^22After my words they spake not again; and my speech dropped upon
   them.

   ^23And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth
   wide as for the latter rain.

   ^24If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my
   countenance they cast not down.

   ^25I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the
   army, as one that comforteth the mourners.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers
   I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.

   ^2Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old
   age was perished?

   ^3For want and famine they were solitary; fleeing into the wilderness
   in former time desolate and waste.

   ^4Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat.

   ^5They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them as
   after a thief;)

   ^6To dwell in the cliffs of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in
   the rocks.

   ^7Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were gathered
   together.

   ^8They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were
   viler than the earth.

   ^9And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.

   ^10They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my
   face.

   ^11Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let
   loose the bridle before me.

   ^12Upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my feet, and they
   raise up against me the ways of their destruction.

   ^13They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper.

   ^14They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation
   they rolled themselves upon me.

   ^15Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my
   welfare passeth away as a cloud.

   ^16And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have
   taken hold upon me.

   ^17My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews take
   no rest.

   ^18By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it bindeth
   me about as the collar of my coat.

   ^19He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.

   ^20I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou
   regardest me not.

   ^21Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest
   thyself against me.

   ^22Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it, and
   dissolvest my substance.

   ^23For I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house
   appointed for all living.

   ^24Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they
   cry in his destruction.

   ^25Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved
   for the poor?

   ^26When I looked for good, then evil came unto me: and when I waited
   for light, there came darkness.

   ^27My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction prevented
   me.

   ^28I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, and I cried in the
   congregation.

   ^29I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.

   ^30My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat.

   ^31My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of
   them that weep.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?

   ^2For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of
   the Almighty from on high?

   ^3Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the
   workers of iniquity?

   ^4Doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?

   ^5If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit;

   ^6Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine
   integrity.

   ^7If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after
   mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands;

   ^8Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted
   out.

   ^9If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait
   at my neighbour's door;

   ^10Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon
   her.

   ^11For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished
   by the judges.

   ^12For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root out
   all mine increase.

   ^13If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant,
   when they contended with me;

   ^14What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what
   shall I answer him?

   ^15Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
   fashion us in the womb?

   ^16If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the
   eyes of the widow to fail;

   ^17Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not
   eaten thereof;

   ^18(For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a father, and
   I have guided her from my mother's womb;)

   ^19If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
   covering;

   ^20If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the
   fleece of my sheep;

   ^21If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my
   help in the gate:

   ^22Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
   broken from the bone.

   ^23For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his
   highness I could not endure.

   ^24If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art
   my confidence;

   ^25If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had
   gotten much;

   ^26If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in
   brightness;

   ^27And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my
   hand:

   ^28This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should
   have denied the God that is above.

   ^29If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up
   myself when evil found him:

   ^30Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his
   soul.

   ^31If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh!
   we cannot be satisfied.

   ^32The stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors to
   the traveller.

   ^33If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in
   my bosom:

   ^34Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families
   terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door?

   ^35Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the Almighty
   would answer me, and that mine adversary had written a book.

   ^36Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to
   me.

   ^37I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I
   go near unto him.

   ^38If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof
   complain;

   ^39If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the
   owners thereof to lose their life:

   ^40Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley.
   The words of Job are ended.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in
   his own eyes.

   ^2Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite,
   of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he
   justified himself rather than God.

   ^3Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they
   had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.

   ^4Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder
   than he.

   ^5When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three
   men, then his wrath was kindled.

   ^6And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am
   young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew
   you mine opinion.

   ^7I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
   wisdom.

   ^8But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty
   giveth them understanding.

   ^9Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand
   judgment.

   ^10Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion.

   ^11Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst
   ye searched out what to say.

   ^12Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you that
   convinced Job, or that answered his words:

   ^13Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him
   down, not man.

   ^14Now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will I answer
   him with your speeches.

   ^15They were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.

   ^16When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and
   answered no more;)

   ^17I said, I will answer also my part, I also will shew mine opinion.

   ^18For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.

   ^19Behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to burst
   like new bottles.

   ^20I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and
   answer.

   ^21Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me give
   flattering titles unto man.

   ^22For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker would
   soon take me away.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my
   words.

   ^2Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my
   mouth.

   ^3My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall
   utter knowledge clearly.

   ^4The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath
   given me life.

   ^5If thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.

   ^6Behold, I am according to thy wish in God's stead: I also am formed
   out of the clay.

   ^7Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand
   be heavy upon thee.

   ^8Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice
   of thy words, saying,

   ^9I am clean without transgression, I am innocent; neither is there
   iniquity in me.

   ^10Behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his
   enemy,

   ^11He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.

   ^12Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is
   greater than man.

   ^13Why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of any
   of his matters.

   ^14For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not.

   ^15In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon
   men, in slumberings upon the bed;

   ^16Then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction,

   ^17That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.

   ^18He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
   by the sword.

   ^19He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of
   his bones with strong pain:

   ^20So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soul dainty meat.

   ^21His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones
   that were not seen stick out.

   ^22Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the
   destroyers.

   ^23If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
   thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness:

   ^24Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down
   to the pit: I have found a ransom.

   ^25His flesh shall be fresher than a child's: he shall return to the
   days of his youth:

   ^26He shall pray unto God, and he will be favourable unto him: and he
   shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his
   righteousness.

   ^27He looketh upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted
   that which was right, and it profited me not;

   ^28He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall
   see the light.

   ^29Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man,

   ^30To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the
   light of the living.

   ^31Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I will speak.

   ^32If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to
   justify thee.

   ^33If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee
   wisdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   Furthermore Elihu answered and said,

   ^2Hear my words, O ye wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have
   knowledge.

   ^3For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.

   ^4Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is
   good.

   ^5For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my
   judgment.

   ^6Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
   transgression.

   ^7What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water?

   ^8Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with
   wicked men.

   ^9For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should delight
   himself with God.

   ^10Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: far be it from
   God, that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he
   should commit iniquity.

   ^11For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man
   to find according to his ways.

   ^12Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty
   pervert judgment.

   ^13Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed the
   whole world?

   ^14If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit
   and his breath;

   ^15All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.

   ^16If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of
   my words.

   ^17Shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn him
   that is most just?

   ^18Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? and to princes, Ye are
   ungodly?

   ^19How much less to him that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor
   regardeth the rich more than the poor? for they all are the work of his
   hands.

   ^20In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at
   midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without
   hand.

   ^21For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings.

   ^22There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
   iniquity may hide themselves.

   ^23For he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should enter
   into judgment with God.

   ^24He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others
   in their stead.

   ^25Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the
   night, so that they are destroyed.

   ^26He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;

   ^27Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his
   ways:

   ^28So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he
   heareth the cry of the afflicted.

   ^29When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
   hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a
   nation, or against a man only:

   ^30That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.

   ^31Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I
   will not offend any more:

   ^32That which I see not teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will
   do no more.

   ^33Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether
   thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore speak what
   thou knowest.

   ^34Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto
   me.

   ^35Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
   wisdom.

   ^36My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his
   answers for wicked men.

   ^37For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands among
   us, and multiplieth his words against God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   Elihu spake moreover, and said,

   ^2Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou saidst, My righteousness is
   more than God's?

   ^3For thou saidst, What advantage will it be unto thee? and, What
   profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?

   ^4I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.

   ^5Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds which are
   higher than thou.

   ^6If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy
   transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?

   ^7If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of
   thine hand?

   ^8Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art; and thy righteousness may
   profit the son of man.

   ^9By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to
   cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.

   ^10But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the
   night;

   ^11Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us
   wiser than the fowls of heaven?

   ^12There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil
   men.

   ^13Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard
   it.

   ^14Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is before
   him; therefore trust thou in him.

   ^15But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he
   knoweth it not in great extremity:

   ^16Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words
   without knowledge.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   Elihu also proceeded, and said,

   ^2Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee that I have yet to speak on
   God's behalf.

   ^3I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness
   to my Maker.

   ^4For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in
   knowledge is with thee.

   ^5Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in
   strength and wisdom.

   ^6He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the
   poor.

   ^7He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are
   they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are
   exalted.

   ^8And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
   affliction;

   ^9Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgressions that they
   have exceeded.

   ^10He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they
   return from iniquity.

   ^11If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in
   prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

   ^12But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall
   die without knowledge.

   ^13But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he
   bindeth them.

   ^14They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.

   ^15He delivereth the poor in his affliction, and openeth their ears in
   oppression.

   ^16Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad
   place, where there is no straitness; and that which should be set on
   thy table should be full of fatness.

   ^17But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and
   justice take hold on thee.

   ^18Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his
   stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

   ^19Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of
   strength.

   ^20Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.

   ^21Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather
   than affliction.

   ^22Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him?

   ^23Who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou hast wrought
   iniquity?

   ^24Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.

   ^25Every man may see it; man may behold it afar off.

   ^26Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of
   his years be searched out.

   ^27For he maketh small the drops of water: they pour down rain
   according to the vapour thereof:

   ^28Which the clouds do drop and distil upon man abundantly.

   ^29Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise
   of his tabernacle?

   ^30Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it, and covereth the bottom of
   the sea.

   ^31For by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance.

   ^32With clouds he covereth the light; and commandeth it not to shine by
   the cloud that cometh betwixt.

   ^33The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattle also concerning
   the vapour.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place.

   ^2Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth out
   of his mouth.

   ^3He directeth it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the
   ends of the earth.

   ^4After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his
   excellency; and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.

   ^5God thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth he,
   which we cannot comprehend.

   ^6For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the small
   rain, and to the great rain of his strength.

   ^7He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.

   ^8Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.

   ^9Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.

   ^10By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters
   is straitened.

   ^11Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his
   bright cloud:

   ^12And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do
   whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world in the earth.

   ^13He causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or
   for mercy.

   ^14Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous
   works of God.

   ^15Dost thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his
   cloud to shine?

   ^16Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of
   him which is perfect in knowledge?

   ^17How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south
   wind?

   ^18Hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a
   molten looking glass?

   ^19Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech
   by reason of darkness.

   ^20Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall
   be swallowed up.

   ^21And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the
   wind passeth, and cleanseth them.

   ^22Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God is terrible majesty.

   ^23Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in
   power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.

   ^24Men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise of
   heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,

   ^2Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

   ^3Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and
   answer thou me.

   ^4Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if
   thou hast understanding.

   ^5Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath
   stretched the line upon it?

   ^6Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the
   corner stone thereof;

   ^7When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted
   for joy?

   ^8Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had
   issued out of the womb?

   ^9When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a
   swaddlingband for it,

   ^10And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,

   ^11And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall
   thy proud waves be stayed?

   ^12Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days; and caused the
   dayspring to know his place;

   ^13That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked
   might be shaken out of it?

   ^14It is turned as clay to the seal; and they stand as a garment.

   ^15And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm
   shall be broken.

   ^16Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked
   in the search of the depth?

   ^17Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or hast thou seen the
   doors of the shadow of death?

   ^18Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou
   knowest it all.

   ^19Where is the way where light dwelleth? and as for darkness, where is
   the place thereof,

   ^20That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou
   shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?

   ^21Knowest thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number
   of thy days is great?

   ^22Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen
   the treasures of the hail,

   ^23Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day
   of battle and war?

   ^24By what way is the light parted, which scattereth the east wind upon
   the earth?

   ^25Who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a
   way for the lightning of thunder;

   ^26To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the
   wilderness, wherein there is no man;

   ^27To satisfy the desolate and waste ground; and to cause the bud of
   the tender herb to spring forth?

   ^28Hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?

   ^29Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who
   hath gendered it?

   ^30The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is
   frozen.

   ^31Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands
   of Orion?

   ^32Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide
   Arcturus with his sons?

   ^33Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion
   thereof in the earth?

   ^34Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters
   may cover thee?

   ^35Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee,
   Here we are?

   ^36Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given
   understanding to the heart?

   ^37Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of
   heaven,

   ^38When the dust groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave fast
   together?

   ^39Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the
   young lions,

   ^40When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in
   wait?

   ^41Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto
   God, they wander for lack of meat.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? or
   canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?

   ^2Canst thou number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou the
   time when they bring forth?

   ^3They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out
   their sorrows.

   ^4Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they go
   forth, and return not unto them.

   ^5Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the bands of
   the wild ass?

   ^6Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his
   dwellings.

   ^7He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth he the
   crying of the driver.

   ^8The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after
   every green thing.

   ^9Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib?

   ^10Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he
   harrow the valleys after thee?

   ^11Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? or wilt thou
   leave thy labour to him?

   ^12Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather
   it into thy barn?

   ^13Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and
   feathers unto the ostrich?

   ^14Which leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust,

   ^15And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast
   may break them.

   ^16She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not
   hers: her labour is in vain without fear;

   ^17Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to
   her understanding.

   ^18What time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and
   his rider.

   ^19Hath thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with
   thunder?

   ^20Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his
   nostrils is terrible.

   ^21He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on
   to meet the armed men.

   ^22He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back
   from the sword.

   ^23The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the
   shield.

   ^24He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believeth
   he that it is the sound of the trumpet.

   ^25He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle afar
   off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.

   ^26Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the
   south?

   ^27Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?

   ^28She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and
   the strong place.

   ^29From thence she seeketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.

   ^30Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is
   she.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   Moreover the Lord answered Job, and said,

   ^2Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that
   reproveth God, let him answer it.

   ^3Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

   ^4Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand
   upon my mouth.

   ^5Once have I spoken; but I will not answer: yea, twice; but I will
   proceed no further.

   ^6Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said,

   ^7Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare
   thou unto me.

   ^8Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou
   mayest be righteous?

   ^9Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like
   him?

   ^10Deck thyself now with majesty and excellency; and array thyself with
   glory and beauty.

   ^11Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is
   proud, and abase him.

   ^12Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down
   the wicked in their place.

   ^13Hide them in the dust together; and bind their faces in secret.

   ^14Then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can
   save thee.

   ^15Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an
   ox.

   ^16Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel
   of his belly.

   ^17He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are
   wrapped together.

   ^18His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of
   iron.

   ^19He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his
   sword to approach unto him.

   ^20Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of
   the field play.

   ^21He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.

   ^22The shady trees cover him with their shadow; the willows of the
   brook compass him about.

   ^23Behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth that he
   can draw up Jordan into his mouth.

   ^24He taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth through snares.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
   which thou lettest down?

   ^2Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a
   thorn?

   ^3Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words
   unto thee?

   ^4Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant
   for ever?

   ^5Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy
   maidens?

   ^6Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among
   the merchants?

   ^7Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish
   spears?

   ^8Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.

   ^9Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even
   at the sight of him?

   ^10None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand
   before me?

   ^11Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under
   the whole heaven is mine.

   ^12I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely
   proportion.

   ^13Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him
   with his double bridle?

   ^14Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round
   about.

   ^15His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.

   ^16One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.

   ^17They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they
   cannot be sundered.

   ^18By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the
   eyelids of the morning.

   ^19Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.

   ^20Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or
   caldron.

   ^21His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.

   ^22In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before
   him.

   ^23The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in
   themselves; they cannot be moved.

   ^24His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the
   nether millstone.

   ^25When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of
   breakings they purify themselves.

   ^26The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the
   dart, nor the habergeon.

   ^27He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

   ^28The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into
   stubble.

   ^29Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

   ^30Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon
   the mire.

   ^31He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot
   of ointment.

   ^32He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be
   hoary.

   ^33Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.

   ^34He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children of
   pride.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   Then Job answered the Lord, and said,

   ^2I know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be
   withholden from thee.

   ^3Who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have I
   uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I
   knew not.

   ^4Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and
   declare thou unto me.

   ^5I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye
   seeth thee.

   ^6Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.

   ^7And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job,
   the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against
   thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the
   thing that is right, as my servant Job hath.

   ^8Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to
   my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my
   servant Job shall pray for you: for him will I accept: lest I deal with
   you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which
   is right, like my servant Job.

   ^9So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the
   Naamathite went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord
   also accepted Job.

   ^10And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his
   friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.

   ^11Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and
   all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread
   with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over
   all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him: every man also gave
   him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.

   ^12So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning:
   for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a
   thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

   ^13He had also seven sons and three daughters.

   ^14And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the
   second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Keren-happuch.

   ^15And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of
   Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.

   ^16After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons,
   and his sons' sons, even four generations.

   ^17So Job died, being old and full of days.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Psalms
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
   standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
   scornful.

   ^2But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he
   meditate day and night.

   ^3And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
   bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither;
   and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

   ^4The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind driveth
   away.

   ^5Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in
   the congregation of the righteous.

   ^6For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the
   ungodly shall perish.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

   ^2The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
   together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying,

   ^3Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

   ^4He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them
   in derision.

   ^5Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
   displeasure.

   ^6Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.

   ^7I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my
   Son; this day have I begotten thee.

   ^8Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
   and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

   ^9Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in
   pieces like a potter's vessel.

   ^10Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the
   earth.

   ^11Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

   ^12Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
   wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their
   trust in him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise
   up against me.

   ^2Many there be which say of my soul, There is no help for him in God.
   Selah.

   ^3But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of
   mine head.

   ^4I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy
   hill. Selah.

   ^5I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained me.

   ^6I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set
   themselves against me round about.

   ^7Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine
   enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.

   ^8Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people.
   Selah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged me
   when I was in distress; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.

   ^2O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long
   will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.

   ^3But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself:
   the Lord will hear when I call unto him.

   ^4Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed,
   and be still. Selah.

   ^5Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the
   Lord.

   ^6There be many that say, Who will shew us any good? Lord, lift thou up
   the light of thy countenance upon us.

   ^7Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their
   corn and their wine increased.

   ^8I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord, only
   makest me dwell in safety.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Give ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.

   ^2Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God: for unto thee
   will I pray.

   ^3My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will
   I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

   ^4For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither
   shall evil dwell with thee.

   ^5The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of
   iniquity.

   ^6Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the
   bloody and deceitful man.

   ^7But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy
   mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

   ^8Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make
   thy way straight before my face.

   ^9For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is
   very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with
   their tongue.

   ^10Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels; cast
   them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have
   rebelled against thee.

   ^11But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them
   ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that
   love thy name be joyful in thee.

   ^12For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou
   compass him as with a shield.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
   displeasure.

   ^2Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am weak: O Lord, heal me; for my
   bones are vexed.

   ^3My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?

   ^4Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies' sake.

   ^5For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall
   give thee thanks?

   ^6I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I
   water my couch with my tears.

   ^7Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of all
   mine enemies.

   ^8Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard
   the voice of my weeping.

   ^9The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.

   ^10Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and
   be ashamed suddenly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that
   persecute me, and deliver me:

   ^2Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there
   is none to deliver.

   ^3O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands;

   ^4If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, I
   have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:)

   ^5Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down
   my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah.

   ^6Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of
   mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast
   commanded.

   ^7So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their
   sakes therefore return thou on high.

   ^8The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my
   righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.

   ^9Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end; but establish the
   just: for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins.

   ^10My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart.

   ^11God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every
   day.

   ^12If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and
   made it ready.

   ^13He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth
   his arrows against the persecutors.

   ^14Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief,
   and brought forth falsehood.

   ^15He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he
   made.

   ^16His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing
   shall come down upon his own pate.

   ^17I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness: and will sing
   praise to the name of the Lord most high.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast
   set thy glory above the heavens.

   ^2Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength
   because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the
   avenger.

   ^3When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and
   the stars, which thou hast ordained;

   ^4What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that
   thou visitest him?

   ^5For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast
   crowned him with glory and honour.

   ^6Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou
   hast put all things under his feet:

   ^7All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;

   ^8The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth
   through the paths of the seas.

   ^9O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all
   thy marvellous works.

   ^2I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O
   thou most High.

   ^3When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
   presence.

   ^4For thou hast maintained my right and my cause; thou satest in the
   throne judging right.

   ^5Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou
   hast put out their name for ever and ever.

   ^6O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast
   destroyed cities; their memorial is perished with them.

   ^7But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for
   judgment.

   ^8And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister
   judgment to the people in uprightness.

   ^9The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times
   of trouble.

   ^10And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou,
   Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.

   ^11Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion: declare among the
   people his doings.

   ^12When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he
   forgetteth not the cry of the humble.

   ^13Have mercy upon me, O Lord; consider my trouble which I suffer of
   them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:

   ^14That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of
   Zion: I will rejoice in thy salvation.

   ^15The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net
   which they hid is their own foot taken.

   ^16The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is
   snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.

   ^17The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that
   forget God.

   ^18For the needy shall not alway be forgotten: the expectation of the
   poor shall not perish for ever.

   ^19Arise, O Lord; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in thy
   sight.

   ^20Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be
   but men. Selah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of
   trouble?

   ^2The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them be taken in
   the devices that they have imagined.

   ^3For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the
   covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth.

   ^4The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after
   God: God is not in all his thoughts.

   ^5His ways are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of his
   sight: as for all his enemies, he puffeth at them.

   ^6He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be
   in adversity.

   ^7His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue
   is mischief and vanity.

   ^8He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret
   places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against
   the poor.

   ^9He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth in wait to
   catch the poor: he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into his
   net.

   ^10He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by his
   strong ones.

   ^11He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten: he hideth his face;
   he will never see it.

   ^12Arise, O Lord; O God, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.

   ^13Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his heart,
   Thou wilt not require it.

   ^14Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite
   it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the
   helper of the fatherless.

   ^15Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: seek out his
   wickedness till thou find none.

   ^16The Lord is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of
   his land.

   ^17Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare
   their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear:

   ^18To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth
   may no more oppress.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   In the Lord put I my trust: How say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to
   your mountain?

   ^2For, lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon
   the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

   ^3If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

   ^4The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord'S throne is in heaven: his
   eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.

   ^5The Lord trieth the righteous: but the wicked and him that loveth
   violence his soul hateth.

   ^6Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
   horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

   ^7For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth
   behold the upright.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among
   the children of men.

   ^2They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips
   and with a double heart do they speak.

   ^3The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
   speaketh proud things:

   ^4Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own:
   who is lord over us?

   ^5For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
   will I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that
   puffeth at him.

   ^6The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of
   earth, purified seven times.

   ^7Thou shalt keep them, O Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this
   generation for ever.

   ^8The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long wilt thou hide
   thy face from me?

   ^2How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
   daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

   ^3Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep
   the sleep of death;

   ^4Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that
   trouble me rejoice when I am moved.

   ^5But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy
   salvation.

   ^6I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt,
   they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth good.

   ^2The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
   there were any that did understand, and seek God.

   ^3They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there
   is none that doeth good, no, not one.

   ^4Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people
   as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

   ^5There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the
   righteous.

   ^6Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his
   refuge.

   ^7Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the Lord
   bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and
   Israel shall be glad.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
   hill?

   ^2He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh
   the truth in his heart.

   ^3He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his
   neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.

   ^4In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that
   fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.

   ^5He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against
   the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.

   ^2O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my
   goodness extendeth not to thee;

   ^3But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in
   whom is all my delight.

   ^4Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god:
   their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their
   names into my lips.

   ^5The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou
   maintainest my lot.

   ^6The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
   heritage.

   ^7I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel: my reins also
   instruct me in the night seasons.

   ^8I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand,
   I shall not be moved.

   ^9Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth: my flesh also
   shall rest in hope.

   ^10For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer
   thine Holy One to see corruption.

   ^11Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of
   joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer,
   that goeth not out of feigned lips.

   ^2Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes behold
   the things that are equal.

   ^3Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou
   hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth
   shall not transgress.

   ^4Concerning the words of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me
   from the paths of the destroyer.

   ^5Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

   ^6I have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, O God: incline thine
   ear unto me, and hear my speech.

   ^7Shew thy marvellous lovingkindness, O thou that savest by thy right
   hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up against
   them.

   ^8Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy
   wings,

   ^9From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass
   me about.

   ^10They are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak
   proudly.

   ^11They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes
   bowing down to the earth;

   ^12Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young
   lion lurking in secret places.

   ^13Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from
   the wicked, which is thy sword:

   ^14From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men of the world, which
   have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy
   hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their
   substance to their babes.

   ^15As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
   satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   I will love thee, O Lord, my strength.

   ^2The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my
   strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my
   salvation, and my high tower.

   ^3I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be
   saved from mine enemies.

   ^4The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made
   me afraid.

   ^5The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented
   me.

   ^6In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he
   heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into
   his ears.

   ^7Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills
   moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.

   ^8There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
   devoured: coals were kindled by it.

   ^9He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his
   feet.

   ^10And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the
   wings of the wind.

   ^11He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were
   dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.

   ^12At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail
   stones and coals of fire.

   ^13The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his
   voice; hail stones and coals of fire.

   ^14Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out
   lightnings, and discomfited them.

   ^15Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the
   world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath
   of thy nostrils.

   ^16He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.

   ^17He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me:
   for they were too strong for me.

   ^18They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my
   stay.

   ^19He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me,
   because he delighted in me.

   ^20The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the
   cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.

   ^21For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
   from my God.

   ^22For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his
   statutes from me.

   ^23I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.

   ^24Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me according to my
   righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

   ^25With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an upright
   man thou wilt shew thyself upright;

   ^26With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou
   wilt shew thyself froward.

   ^27For thou wilt save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down high
   looks.

   ^28For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my
   darkness.

   ^29For by thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped
   over a wall.

   ^30As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is
   a buckler to all those that trust in him.

   ^31For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God?

   ^32It is God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect.

   ^33He maketh my feet like hinds' feet, and setteth me upon my high
   places.

   ^34He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by
   mine arms.

   ^35Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right
   hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great.

   ^36Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip.

   ^37I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn
   again till they were consumed.

   ^38I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen
   under my feet.

   ^39For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle: thou hast
   subdued under me those that rose up against me.

   ^40Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might
   destroy them that hate me.

   ^41They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but
   he answered them not.

   ^42Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast
   them out as the dirt in the streets.

   ^43Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou
   hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known
   shall serve me.

   ^44As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall
   submit themselves unto me.

   ^45The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close
   places.

   ^46The Lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my
   salvation be exalted.

   ^47It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

   ^48He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above
   those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent
   man.

   ^49Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen,
   and sing praises unto thy name.

   ^50Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to his
   anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his
   handywork.

   ^2Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.

   ^3There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.

   ^4Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the
   end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,

   ^5Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as
   a strong man to run a race.

   ^6His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto
   the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

   ^7The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of
   the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

   ^8The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the
   commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.

   ^9The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of
   the Lord are true and righteous altogether.

   ^10More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold:
   sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.

   ^11Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there
   is great reward.

   ^12Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.

   ^13Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have
   dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from
   the great transgression.

   ^14Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be
   acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob
   defend thee;

   ^2Send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion;

   ^3Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice; Selah.

   ^4Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.

   ^5We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will
   set up our banners: the Lord fulfil all thy petitions.

   ^6Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed; he will hear him from
   his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.

   ^7Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the
   name of the Lord our God.

   ^8They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand
   upright.

   ^9Save, Lord: let the king hear us when we call.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   The king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord; and in thy salvation how
   greatly shall he rejoice!

   ^2Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and hast not withholden the
   request of his lips. Selah.

   ^3For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou settest
   a crown of pure gold on his head.

   ^4He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days
   for ever and ever.

   ^5His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou
   laid upon him.

   ^6For thou hast made him most blessed for ever: thou hast made him
   exceeding glad with thy countenance.

   ^7For the king trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most
   High he shall not be moved.

   ^8Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall
   find out those that hate thee.

   ^9Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the
   Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour
   them.

   ^10Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from
   among the children of men.

   ^11For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous
   device, which they are not able to perform.

   ^12Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt make
   ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.

   ^13Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and
   praise thy power.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from
   helping me, and from the words of my roaring?

   ^2O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest not; and in the
   night season, and am not silent.

   ^3But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.

   ^4Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver
   them.

   ^5They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and
   were not confounded.

   ^6But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the
   people.

   ^7All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they
   shake the head saying,

   ^8He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver
   him, seeing he delighted in him.

   ^9But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope
   when I was upon my mother's breasts.

   ^10I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mother's
   belly.

   ^11Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help.

   ^12Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me
   round.

   ^13They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring
   lion.

   ^14I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my
   heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.

   ^15My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to
   my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death.

   ^16For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed
   me: they pierced my hands and my feet.

   ^17I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.

   ^18They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.

   ^19But be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my strength, haste thee to
   help me.

   ^20Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the
   dog.

   ^21Save me from the lion's mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns
   of the unicorns.

   ^22I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the
   congregation will I praise thee.

   ^23Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify
   him; and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.

   ^24For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the
   afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried
   unto him, he heard.

   ^25My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my
   vows before them that fear him.

   ^26The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that
   seek him: your heart shall live for ever.

   ^27All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord: and
   all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.

   ^28For the kingdom is the Lord'S: and he is the governor among the
   nations.

   ^29All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that
   go down to the dust shall bow before him: and none can keep alive his
   own soul.

   ^30A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a
   generation.

   ^31They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people
   that shall be born, that he hath done this.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.

   ^2He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the
   still waters.

   ^3He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for
   his name's sake.

   ^4Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
   fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort
   me.

   ^5Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies:
   thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.

   ^6Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
   and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   The earth is the Lord'S, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they
   that dwell therein.

   ^2For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the
   floods.

   ^3Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his
   holy place?

   ^4He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up
   his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

   ^5He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from
   the God of his salvation.

   ^6This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O
   Jacob. Selah.

   ^7Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
   doors; and the King of glory shall come in.

   ^8Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
   mighty in battle.

   ^9Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting
   doors; and the King of glory shall come in.

   ^10Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of
   glory. Selah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

   ^2O my God, I trust in thee: let me not be ashamed, let not mine
   enemies triumph over me.

   ^3Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which
   transgress without cause.

   ^4Shew me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths.

   ^5Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my
   salvation; on thee do I wait all the day.

   ^6Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for
   they have been ever of old.

   ^7Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according
   to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness' sake, O Lord.

   ^8Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the
   way.

   ^9The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his
   way.

   ^10All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
   covenant and his testimonies.

   ^11For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.

   ^12What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way
   that he shall choose.

   ^13His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.

   ^14The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew
   them his covenant.

   ^15Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; for he shall pluck my feet out
   of the net.

   ^16Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and
   afflicted.

   ^17The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my
   distresses.

   ^18Look upon mine affliction and my pain; and forgive all my sins.

   ^19Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with
   cruel hatred.

   ^20O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I put my
   trust in thee.

   ^21Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.

   ^22Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted
   also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide.

   ^2Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.

   ^3For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy
   truth.

   ^4I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
   dissemblers.

   ^5I have hated the congregation of evildoers; and will not sit with the
   wicked.

   ^6I will wash mine hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, O
   Lord:

   ^7That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all
   thy wondrous works.

   ^8Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
   thine honour dwelleth.

   ^9Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:

   ^10In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes.

   ^11But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be
   merciful unto me.

   ^12My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will I bless
   the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is
   the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?

   ^2When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat
   up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.

   ^3Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear:
   though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

   ^4One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I
   may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
   the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.

   ^5For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the
   secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a
   rock.

   ^6And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about
   me: therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I will
   sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord.

   ^7Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and
   answer me.

   ^8When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face,
   Lord, will I seek.

   ^9Hide not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger:
   thou hast been my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
   salvation.

   ^10When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
   up.

   ^11Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of
   mine enemies.

   ^12Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false
   witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.

   ^13I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord
   in the land of the living.

   ^14Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine
   heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock; be not silent to me: lest, if
   thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

   ^2Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift
   up my hands toward thy holy oracle.

   ^3Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity,
   which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts.

   ^4Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness
   of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to
   them their desert.

   ^5Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of
   his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

   ^6Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my
   supplications.

   ^7The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I
   am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song will
   I praise him.

   ^8The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his
   anointed.

   ^9Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and
   lift them up for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength.

   ^2Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in
   the beauty of holiness.

   ^3The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory
   thundereth: the Lord is upon many waters.

   ^4The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of
   majesty.

   ^5The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the Lord breaketh the
   cedars of Lebanon.

   ^6He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a
   young unicorn.

   ^7The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire.

   ^8The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness; the Lord shaketh the
   wilderness of Kadesh.

   ^9The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve, and discovereth the
   forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.

   ^10The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth King for
   ever.

   ^11The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his
   people with peace.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   I will extol thee, O Lord; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not
   made my foes to rejoice over me.

   ^2O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.

   ^3O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast kept
   me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.

   ^4Sing unto the Lord, O ye saints of his, and give thanks at the
   remembrance of his holiness.

   ^5For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: weeping
   may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.

   ^6And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.

   ^7Lord, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong: thou
   didst hide thy face, and I was troubled.

   ^8I cried to thee, O Lord; and unto the Lord I made supplication.

   ^9What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall
   the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?

   ^10Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper.

   ^11Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off
   my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;

   ^12To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent.
   O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me
   in thy righteousness.

   ^2Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong
   rock, for an house of defence to save me.

   ^3For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name's sake
   lead me, and guide me.

   ^4Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou
   art my strength.

   ^5Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God
   of truth.

   ^6I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the
   Lord.

   ^7I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my
   trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities;

   ^8And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set my
   feet in a large room.

   ^9Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed
   with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.

   ^10For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my
   strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.

   ^11I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my
   neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me
   without fled from me.

   ^12I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.

   ^13For I have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: while
   they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my
   life.

   ^14But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God.

   ^15My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies,
   and from them that persecute me.

   ^16Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies'
   sake.

   ^17Let me not be ashamed, O Lord; for I have called upon thee: let the
   wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.

   ^18Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous things
   proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.

   ^19Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that
   fear thee; which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before
   the sons of men!

   ^20Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of
   man: thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of
   tongues.

   ^21Blessed be the Lord: for he hath shewed me his marvellous kindness
   in a strong city.

   ^22For I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes:
   nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried
   unto thee.

   ^23O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth the
   faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer.

   ^24Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that
   hope in the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.

   ^2Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in
   whose spirit there is no guile.

   ^3When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the
   day long.

   ^4For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned
   into the drought of summer. Selah.

   ^5I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I
   said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou
   forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.

   ^6For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when
   thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall
   not come nigh unto him.

   ^7Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou
   shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.

   ^8I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I
   will guide thee with mine eye.

   ^9Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding:
   whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near
   unto thee.

   ^10Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the
   Lord, mercy shall compass him about.

   ^11Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy,
   all ye that are upright in heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the
   upright.

   ^2Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery and an
   instrument of ten strings.

   ^3Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud noise.

   ^4For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are done in
   truth.

   ^5He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the
   goodness of the Lord.

   ^6By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the host of
   them by the breath of his mouth.

   ^7He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap: he layeth up
   the depth in storehouses.

   ^8Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world
   stand in awe of him.

   ^9For he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.

   ^10The Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he maketh
   the devices of the people of none effect.

   ^11The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart
   to all generations.

   ^12Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: and the people whom he
   hath chosen for his own inheritance.

   ^13The Lord looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men.

   ^14From the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants
   of the earth.

   ^15He fashioneth their hearts alike; he considereth all their works.

   ^16There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is
   not delivered by much strength.

   ^17An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by
   his great strength.

   ^18Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them
   that hope in his mercy;

   ^19To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.

   ^20Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.

   ^21For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his
   holy name.

   ^22Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we hope in thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in
   my mouth.

   ^2My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear
   thereof, and be glad.

   ^3O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

   ^4I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my
   fears.

   ^5They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
   ashamed.

   ^6This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all
   his troubles.

   ^7The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
   delivereth them.

   ^8O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that
   trusteth in him.

   ^9O fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that
   fear him.

   ^10The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the
   Lord shall not want any good thing.

   ^11Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the
   Lord.

   ^12What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may
   see good?

   ^13Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

   ^14Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.

   ^15The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open
   unto their cry.

   ^16The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
   remembrance of them from the earth.

   ^17The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of
   all their troubles.

   ^18The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth
   such as be of a contrite spirit.

   ^19Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth
   him out of them all.

   ^20He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken.

   ^21Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall
   be desolate.

   ^22The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that
   trust in him shall be desolate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: fight against
   them that fight against me.

   ^2Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.

   ^3Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute
   me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

   ^4Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let
   them be turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.

   ^5Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let the angel of the Lord
   chase them.

   ^6Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the Lord
   persecute them.

   ^7For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which
   without cause they have digged for my soul.

   ^8Let destruction come upon him at unawares; and let his net that he
   hath hid catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.

   ^9And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his
   salvation.

   ^10All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which
   deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor
   and the needy from him that spoileth him?

   ^11False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I
   knew not.

   ^12They rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul.

   ^13But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I
   humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own
   bosom.

   ^14I behaved myself as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed
   down heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother.

   ^15But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves
   together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and
   I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not:

   ^16With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their
   teeth.

   ^17Lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their
   destructions, my darling from the lions.

   ^18I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise
   thee among much people.

   ^19Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me:
   neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.

   ^20For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters against
   them that are quiet in the land.

   ^21Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha,
   our eye hath seen it.

   ^22This thou hast seen, O Lord: keep not silence: O Lord, be not far
   from me.

   ^23Stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my
   God and my Lord.

   ^24Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness; and let
   them not rejoice over me.

   ^25Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them
   not say, We have swallowed him up.

   ^26Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice
   at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify
   themselves against me.

   ^27Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause:
   yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath
   pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.

   ^28And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise all
   the day long.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no
   fear of God before his eyes.

   ^2For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
   found to be hateful.

   ^3The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off to
   be wise, and to do good.

   ^4He deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that
   is not good; he abhorreth not evil.

   ^5Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth
   unto the clouds.

   ^6Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a
   great deep: O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.

   ^7How excellent is thy lovingkindness, O God! therefore the children of
   men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.

   ^8They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and
   thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.

   ^9For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see
   light.

   ^10O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy
   righteousness to the upright in heart.

   ^11Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of
   the wicked remove me.

   ^12There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and
   shall not be able to rise.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against
   the workers of iniquity.

   ^2For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the
   green herb.

   ^3Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and
   verily thou shalt be fed.

   ^4Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires
   of thine heart.

   ^5Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring
   it to pass.

   ^6And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
   judgment as the noonday.

   ^7Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself
   because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who
   bringeth wicked devices to pass.

   ^8Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself in any wise to
   do evil.

   ^9For evildoers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord,
   they shall inherit the earth.

   ^10For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt
   diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

   ^11But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves
   in the abundance of peace.

   ^12The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
   teeth.

   ^13The Lord shall laugh at him: for he seeth that his day is coming.

   ^14The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to
   cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright
   conversation.

   ^15Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall
   be broken.

   ^16A little that a righteous man hath is better than the riches of many
   wicked.

   ^17For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth
   the righteous.

   ^18The Lord knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance
   shall be for ever.

   ^19They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of
   famine they shall be satisfied.

   ^20But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as
   the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume
   away.

   ^21The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous
   sheweth mercy, and giveth.

   ^22For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth; and they that
   be cursed of him shall be cut off.

   ^23The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delighteth
   in his way.

   ^24Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord
   upholdeth him with his hand.

   ^25I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous
   forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.

   ^26He is ever merciful, and lendeth; and his seed is blessed.

   ^27Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.

   ^28For the Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are
   preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.

   ^29The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.

   ^30The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh
   of judgment.

   ^31The law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps shall slide.

   ^32The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.

   ^33The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is
   judged.

   ^34Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to
   inherit the land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.

   ^35I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a
   green bay tree.

   ^36Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he
   could not be found.

   ^37Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that
   man is peace.

   ^38But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the
   wicked shall be cut off.

   ^39But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their
   strength in the time of trouble.

   ^40And the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them
   from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot
   displeasure.

   ^2For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.

   ^3There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is
   there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

   ^4For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they
   are too heavy for me.

   ^5My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.

   ^6I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day
   long.

   ^7For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no
   soundness in my flesh.

   ^8I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the
   disquietness of my heart.

   ^9Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from
   thee.

   ^10My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine
   eyes, it also is gone from me.

   ^11My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my kinsmen
   stand afar off.

   ^12They also that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they that
   seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day
   long.

   ^13But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that
   openeth not his mouth.

   ^14Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
   reproofs.

   ^15For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God.

   ^16For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me:
   when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

   ^17For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.

   ^18For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.

   ^19But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate
   me wrongfully are multiplied.

   ^20They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries; because I
   follow the thing that good is.

   ^21Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me.

   ^22Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I
   will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.

   ^2I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my
   sorrow was stirred.

   ^3My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then
   spake I with my tongue,

   ^4Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it
   is; that I may know how frail I am.

   ^5Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as
   nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether
   vanity. Selah.

   ^6Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted
   in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.

   ^7And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.

   ^8Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of
   the foolish.

   ^9I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.

   ^10Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine
   hand.

   ^11When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest
   his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity.
   Selah.

   ^12Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace
   at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my
   fathers were.

   ^13O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be
   no more.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined unto me, and heard my
   cry.

   ^2He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay,
   and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.

   ^3And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God:
   many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.

   ^4Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth
   not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

   ^5Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done,
   and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in
   order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more
   than can be numbered.

   ^6Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou
   opened: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required.

   ^7Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of
   me,

   ^8I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.

   ^9I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have
   not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest.

   ^10I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared
   thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy
   lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.

   ^11Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy
   lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.

   ^12For innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities have
   taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more
   than the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart faileth me.

   ^13Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord, make haste to help me.

   ^14Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul
   to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish
   me evil.

   ^15Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto me,
   Aha, aha.

   ^16Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such
   as love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified.

   ^17But I am poor and needy; yet the Lord thinketh upon me: thou art my
   help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, O my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in
   time of trouble.

   ^2The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be
   blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of
   his enemies.

   ^3The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt
   make all his bed in his sickness.

   ^4I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for I have sinned
   against thee.

   ^5Mine enemies speak evil of me, When shall he die, and his name
   perish?

   ^6And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth
   iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.

   ^7All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they
   devise my hurt.

   ^8An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he
   lieth he shall rise up no more.

   ^9Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my
   bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.

   ^10But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may
   requite them.

   ^11By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not
   triumph over me.

   ^12And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me
   before thy face for ever.

   ^13Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to
   everlasting. Amen, and Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after
   thee, O God.

   ^2My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and
   appear before God?

   ^3My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say
   unto me, Where is thy God?

   ^4When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had
   gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the
   voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.

   ^5Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me?
   hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him for the help of his
   countenance.

   ^6O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember
   thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill
   Mizar.

   ^7Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy waves
   and thy billows are gone over me.

   ^8Yet the Lord will command his lovingkindness in the daytime, and in
   the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my
   life.

   ^9I will say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I
   mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

   ^10As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they
   say daily unto me, Where is thy God?

   ^11Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
   within me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the
   health of my countenance, and my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 43

   Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O
   deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.

   ^2For thou art the God of my strength: why dost thou cast me off? why
   go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?

   ^3O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring
   me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.

   ^4Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea,
   upon the harp will I praise thee, O God my God.

   ^5Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
   me? hope in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
   countenance, and my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 44

   We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work
   thou didst in their days, in the times of old.

   ^2How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst
   them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.

   ^3For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither
   did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the
   light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them.

   ^4Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances for Jacob.

   ^5Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we
   tread them under that rise up against us.

   ^6For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

   ^7But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame
   that hated us.

   ^8In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever.
   Selah.

   ^9But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with
   our armies.

   ^10Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us
   spoil for themselves.

   ^11Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat; and hast scattered
   us among the heathen.

   ^12Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth
   by their price.

   ^13Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision
   to them that are round about us.

   ^14Thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head
   among the people.

   ^15My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face hath
   covered me,

   ^16For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of
   the enemy and avenger.

   ^17All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither
   have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.

   ^18Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from
   thy way;

   ^19Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered
   us with the shadow of death.

   ^20If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands
   to a strange god;

   ^21Shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the
   heart.

   ^22Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as
   sheep for the slaughter.

   ^23Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.

   ^24Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and
   our oppression?

   ^25For our soul is bowed down to the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the
   earth.

   ^26Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies' sake.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 45

   My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have
   made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

   ^2Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy
   lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.

   ^3Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy
   majesty.

   ^4And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness
   and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.

   ^5Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; whereby
   the people fall under thee.

   ^6Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom
   is a right sceptre.

   ^7Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy
   God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

   ^8All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the
   ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

   ^9Kings' daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right hand
   did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.

   ^10Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget
   also thine own people, and thy father's house;

   ^11So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord; and
   worship thou him.

   ^12And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift; even the rich
   among the people shall intreat thy favour.

   ^13The king's daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of
   wrought gold.

   ^14She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the
   virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.

   ^15With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter
   into the king's palace.

   ^16Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make
   princes in all the earth.

   ^17I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore
   shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 46

   God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

   ^2Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though
   the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;

   ^3Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains
   shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.

   ^4There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of
   God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most High.

   ^5God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help
   her, and that right early.

   ^6The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the
   earth melted.

   ^7The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

   ^8Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in
   the earth.

   ^9He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the
   bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the
   fire.

   ^10Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the
   heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.

   ^11The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 47

   O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of
   triumph.

   ^2For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the
   earth.

   ^3He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.

   ^4He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom
   he loved. Selah.

   ^5God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.

   ^6Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing
   praises.

   ^7For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with
   understanding.

   ^8God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his
   holiness.

   ^9The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of
   the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is
   greatly exalted.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 48

   Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in
   the mountain of his holiness.

   ^2Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion,
   on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.

   ^3God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

   ^4For, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.

   ^5They saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted
   away.

   ^6Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

   ^7Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.

   ^8As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts,
   in the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah.

   ^9We have thought of thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of thy
   temple.

   ^10According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the
   earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.

   ^11Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because
   of thy judgments.

   ^12Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.

   ^13Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it
   to the generation following.

   ^14For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even
   unto death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 49

   Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world:

   ^2Both low and high, rich and poor, together.

   ^3My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall
   be of understanding.

   ^4I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying upon
   the harp.

   ^5Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my
   heels shall compass me about?

   ^6They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
   multitude of their riches;

   ^7None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a
   ransom for him:

   ^8(For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for
   ever:)

   ^9That he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.

   ^10For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish
   person perish, and leave their wealth to others.

   ^11Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever,
   and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands
   after their own names.

   ^12Nevertheless man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts
   that perish.

   ^13This their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their
   sayings. Selah.

   ^14Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; and
   the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their
   beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.

   ^15But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he
   shall receive me. Selah.

   ^16Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his
   house is increased;

   ^17For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not
   descend after him.

   ^18Though while he lived he blessed his soul: and men will praise thee,
   when thou doest well to thyself.

   ^19He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see
   light.

   ^20Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts
   that perish.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 50

   The mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken, and called the earth from
   the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.

   ^2Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.

   ^3Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour
   before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.

   ^4He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he
   may judge his people.

   ^5Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant
   with me by sacrifice.

   ^6And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge
   himself. Selah.

   ^7Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify
   against thee: I am God, even thy God.

   ^8I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt offerings, to
   have been continually before me.

   ^9I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy
   folds.

   ^10For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a
   thousand hills.

   ^11I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the
   field are mine.

   ^12If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and
   the fulness thereof.

   ^13Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?

   ^14Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most High:

   ^15And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and
   thou shalt glorify me.

   ^16But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my
   statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?

   ^17Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.

   ^18When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast
   been partaker with adulterers.

   ^19Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.

   ^20Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine
   own mother's son.

   ^21These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest
   that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee,
   and set them in order before thine eyes.

   ^22Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces,
   and there be none to deliver.

   ^23Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his
   conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 51

   Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according
   unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

   ^2Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

   ^3For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

   ^4Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
   sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear
   when thou judgest.

   ^5Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive
   me.

   ^6Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden
   part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.

   ^7Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
   whiter than snow.

   ^8Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast
   broken may rejoice.

   ^9Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

   ^10Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within
   me.

   ^11Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit
   from me.

   ^12Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy
   free spirit.

   ^13Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be
   converted unto thee.

   ^14Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation:
   and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

   ^15O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.

   ^16For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou
   delightest not in burnt offering.

   ^17The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
   heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

   ^18Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of
   Jerusalem.

   ^19Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
   with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer
   bullocks upon thine altar.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 52

   Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of
   God endureth continually.

   ^2Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp rasor, working
   deceitfully.

   ^3Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak
   righteousness. Selah.

   ^4Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

   ^5God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away,
   and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land
   of the living. Selah.

   ^6The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:

   ^7Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in
   the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his
   wickedness.

   ^8But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the
   mercy of God for ever and ever.

   ^9I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will
   wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 53

   The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and
   have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good.

   ^2God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
   were any that did understand, that did seek God.

   ^3Every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become filthy;
   there is none that doeth good, no, not one.

   ^4Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as
   they eat bread: they have not called upon God.

   ^5There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath
   scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put
   them to shame, because God hath despised them.

   ^6Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God
   bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and
   Israel shall be glad.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 54

   Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.

   ^2Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.

   ^3For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my
   soul: they have not set God before them. Selah.

   ^4Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my
   soul.

   ^5He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.

   ^6I will freely sacrifice unto thee: I will praise thy name, O Lord;
   for it is good.

   ^7For he hath delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye hath seen
   his desire upon mine enemies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 55

   Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my
   supplication.

   ^2Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a
   noise;

   ^3Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the
   wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

   ^4My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are
   fallen upon me.

   ^5Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath
   overwhelmed me.

   ^6And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly
   away, and be at rest.

   ^7Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.

   ^8I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.

   ^9Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence
   and strife in the city.

   ^10Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also
   and sorrow are in the midst of it.

   ^11Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from
   her streets.

   ^12For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne
   it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against
   me; then I would have hid myself from him:

   ^13But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.

   ^14We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
   company.

   ^15Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
   wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

   ^16As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me.

   ^17Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and
   he shall hear my voice.

   ^18He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against
   me: for there were many with me.

   ^19God shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old.
   Selah. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.

   ^20He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he
   hath broken his covenant.

   ^21The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his
   heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.

   ^22Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
   never suffer the righteous to be moved.

   ^23But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction:
   bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will
   trust in thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 56

   Be merciful unto me, O God: for man would swallow me up; he fighting
   daily oppresseth me.

   ^2Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight
   against me, O thou most High.

   ^3What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

   ^4In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust; I will not
   fear what flesh can do unto me.

   ^5Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for
   evil.

   ^6They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my
   steps, when they wait for my soul.

   ^7Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O
   God.

   ^8Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are
   they not in thy book?

   ^9When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know;
   for God is for me.

   ^10In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word.

   ^11In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do
   unto me.

   ^12Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.

   ^13For thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my
   feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the
   living?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 57

   Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me: for my soul trusteth
   in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until
   these calamities be overpast.

   ^2I will cry unto God most high; unto God that performeth all things
   for me.

   ^3He shall send from heaven, and save from the reproach of him that
   would swallow me up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his
   truth.

   ^4My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on
   fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and
   their tongue a sharp sword.

   ^5Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above all
   the earth.

   ^6They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they
   have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen
   themselves. Selah.

   ^7My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give
   praise.

   ^8Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake
   early.

   ^9I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee
   among the nations.

   ^10For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the
   clouds.

   ^11Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above
   all the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 58

   Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge
   uprightly, O ye sons of men?

   ^2Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of your hands
   in the earth.

   ^3The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as
   they be born, speaking lies.

   ^4Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf
   adder that stoppeth her ear;

   ^5Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so
   wisely.

   ^6Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth
   of the young lions, O Lord.

   ^7Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bendeth
   his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

   ^8As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away: like the
   untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

   ^9Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with
   a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.

   ^10The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall
   wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.

   ^11So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
   verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 59

   Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise
   up against me.

   ^2Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.

   ^3For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered
   against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

   ^4They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me,
   and behold.

   ^5Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to
   visit all the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors.
   Selah.

   ^6They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round
   about the city.

   ^7Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips:
   for who, say they, doth hear?

   ^8But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have all the
   heathen in derision.

   ^9Because of his strength will I wait upon thee: for God is my defence.

   ^10The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire
   upon mine enemies.

   ^11Slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and
   bring them down, O Lord our shield.

   ^12For the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them even
   be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.

   ^13Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let
   them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah.

   ^14And at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a
   dog, and go round about the city.

   ^15Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
   satisfied.

   ^16But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in
   the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the day of my
   trouble.

   ^17Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defence, and
   the God of my mercy.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 60

   O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been
   displeased; O turn thyself to us again.

   ^2Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the
   breaches thereof; for it shaketh.

   ^3Thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink
   the wine of astonishment.

   ^4Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
   displayed because of the truth. Selah.

   ^5That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear
   me.

   ^6God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
   Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

   ^7Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of
   mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;

   ^8Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia,
   triumph thou because of me.

   ^9Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

   ^10Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O God,
   which didst not go out with our armies?

   ^11Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

   ^12Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread
   down our enemies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 61

   Hear my cry, O God; attend unto my prayer.

   ^2From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is
   overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I.

   ^3For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the
   enemy.

   ^4I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert
   of thy wings. Selah.

   ^5For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage
   of those that fear thy name.

   ^6Thou wilt prolong the king's life: and his years as many generations.

   ^7He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which
   may preserve him.

   ^8So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily
   perform my vows.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 62

   Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation.

   ^2He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be
   greatly moved.

   ^3How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain
   all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.

   ^4They only consult to cast him down from his excellency: they delight
   in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.

   ^5My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him.

   ^6He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall not be
   moved.

   ^7In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my
   refuge, is in God.

   ^8Trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him:
   God is a refuge for us. Selah.

   ^9Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
   lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than
   vanity.

   ^10Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches
   increase, set not your heart upon them.

   ^11God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that power belongeth
   unto God.

   ^12Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every
   man according to his work.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 63

   O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for
   thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no
   water is;

   ^2To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the
   sanctuary.

   ^3Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise
   thee.

   ^4Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy
   name.

   ^5My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth
   shall praise thee with joyful lips:

   ^6When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night
   watches.

   ^7Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings
   will I rejoice.

   ^8My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.

   ^9But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower
   parts of the earth.

   ^10They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.

   ^11But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him
   shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 64

   Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the
   enemy.

   ^2Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insurrection
   of the workers of iniquity:

   ^3Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot
   their arrows, even bitter words:

   ^4That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot
   at him, and fear not.

   ^5They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying
   snares privily; they say, Who shall see them?

   ^6They search out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search: both
   the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart, is deep.

   ^7But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall they be
   wounded.

   ^8So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that
   see them shall flee away.

   ^9And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they
   shall wisely consider of his doing.

   ^10The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and
   all the upright in heart shall glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 65

   Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be
   performed.

   ^2O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

   ^3Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shalt
   purge them away.

   ^4Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
   thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the
   goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.

   ^5By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our
   salvation; who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of
   them that are afar off upon the sea:

   ^6Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being girded with
   power:

   ^7Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and
   the tumult of the people.

   ^8They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens:
   thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

   ^9Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it
   with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them
   corn, when thou hast so provided for it.

   ^10Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the
   furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the
   springing thereof.

   ^11Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop
   fatness.

   ^12They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills
   rejoice on every side.

   ^13The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered
   over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 66

   Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands:

   ^2Sing forth the honour of his name: make his praise glorious.

   ^3Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! through the
   greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.

   ^4All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they
   shall sing to thy name. Selah.

   ^5Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the
   children of men.

   ^6He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on foot:
   there did we rejoice in him.

   ^7He ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not
   the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.

   ^8O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be
   heard:

   ^9Which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be
   moved.

   ^10For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is
   tried.

   ^11Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst affliction upon our
   loins.

   ^12Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire
   and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

   ^13I will go into thy house with burnt offerings: I will pay thee my
   vows,

   ^14Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in
   trouble.

   ^15I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the
   incense of rams; I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.

   ^16Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath
   done for my soul.

   ^17I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.

   ^18If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me:

   ^19But verily God hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice of my
   prayer.

   ^20Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy
   from me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 67

   God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon
   us; Selah.

   ^2That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all
   nations.

   ^3Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

   ^4O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the
   people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.

   ^5Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

   ^6Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God,
   shall bless us.

   ^7God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 68

   Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate
   him flee before him.

   ^2As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before
   the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

   ^3But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God: yea, let
   them exceedingly rejoice.

   ^4Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon
   the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him.

   ^5A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his
   holy habitation.

   ^6God setteth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which are
   bound with chains: but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.

   ^7O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst
   march through the wilderness; Selah:

   ^8The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God:
   even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.

   ^9Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm
   thine inheritance, when it was weary.

   ^10Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, O God, hast prepared of
   thy goodness for the poor.

   ^11The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that
   published it.

   ^12Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home divided
   the spoil.

   ^13Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of
   a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.

   ^14When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in
   Salmon.

   ^15The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan; an high hill as the hill
   of Bashan.

   ^16Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God desireth to
   dwell in; yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.

   ^17The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels:
   the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.

   ^18Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou
   hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the
   Lord God might dwell among them.

   ^19Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the
   God of our salvation. Selah.

   ^20He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord
   belong the issues from death.

   ^21But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of
   such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.

   ^22The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my
   people again from the depths of the sea:

   ^23That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the
   tongue of thy dogs in the same.

   ^24They have seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my
   King, in the sanctuary.

   ^25The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after;
   among them were the damsels playing with timbrels.

   ^26Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain
   of Israel.

   ^27There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and
   their council, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.

   ^28Thy God hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which
   thou hast wrought for us.

   ^29Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents unto
   thee.

   ^30Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with the
   calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of
   silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war.

   ^31Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her
   hands unto God.

   ^32Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the
   Lord; Selah:

   ^33To him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old;
   lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.

   ^34Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his
   strength is in the clouds.

   ^35O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel
   is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 69

   Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul.

   ^2I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep
   waters, where the floods overflow me.

   ^3I am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I
   wait for my God.

   ^4They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine
   head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are
   mighty: then I restored that which I took not away.

   ^5O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from
   thee.

   ^6Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord GOD of hosts, be ashamed for
   my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God
   of Israel.

   ^7Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my
   face.

   ^8I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my
   mother's children.

   ^9For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of
   them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.

   ^10When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my
   reproach.

   ^11I made sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb to them.

   ^12They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of
   the drunkards.

   ^13But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable
   time: O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy
   salvation.

   ^14Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered
   from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

   ^15Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me
   up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

   ^16Hear me, O Lord; for thy lovingkindness is good: turn unto me
   according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

   ^17And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hear me
   speedily.

   ^18Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine
   enemies.

   ^19Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine
   adversaries are all before thee.

   ^20Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and I
   looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters,
   but I found none.

   ^21They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me
   vinegar to drink.

   ^22Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should
   have been for their welfare, let it become a trap.

   ^23Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins
   continually to shake.

   ^24Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger
   take hold of them.

   ^25Let their habitation be desolate; and let none dwell in their tents.

   ^26For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to the
   grief of those whom thou hast wounded.

   ^27Add iniquity unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy
   righteousness.

   ^28Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be
   written with the righteous.

   ^29But I am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me up on
   high.

   ^30I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with
   thanksgiving.

   ^31This also shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock that
   hath horns and hoofs.

   ^32The humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live
   that seek God.

   ^33For the Lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.

   ^34Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that
   moveth therein.

   ^35For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah: that
   they may dwell there, and have it in possession.

   ^36The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love
   his name shall dwell therein.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 70

   Make haste, O God, to deliver me; make haste to help me, O Lord.

   ^2Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them
   be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.

   ^3Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha,
   aha.

   ^4Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: and let
   such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.

   ^5But I am poor and needy: make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help
   and my deliverer; O Lord, make no tarrying.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 71

   In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion.

   ^2Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline
   thine ear unto me, and save me.

   ^3Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort:
   thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my
   fortress.

   ^4Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand
   of the unrighteous and cruel man.

   ^5For thou art my hope, O Lord GOD: thou art my trust from my youth.

   ^6By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me
   out of my mother's bowels: my praise shall be continually of thee.

   ^7I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.

   ^8Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honour all the
   day.

   ^9Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not when my
   strength faileth.

   ^10For mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my
   soul take counsel together,

   ^11Saying, God hath forsaken him: persecute and take him; for there is
   none to deliver him.

   ^12O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help.

   ^13Let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my soul;
   let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that seek my hurt.

   ^14But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.

   ^15My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness and thy salvation all
   the day; for I know not the numbers thereof.

   ^16I will go in the strength of the Lord GOD: I will make mention of
   thy righteousness, even of thine only.

   ^17O God, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I
   declared thy wondrous works.

   ^18Now also when I am old and greyheaded, O God, forsake me not; until
   I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every
   one that is to come.

   ^19Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who hast done great
   things: O God, who is like unto thee!

   ^20Thou, which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me
   again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the earth.

   ^21Thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.

   ^22I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God:
   unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel.

   ^23My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee; and my soul,
   which thou hast redeemed.

   ^24My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for
   they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my
   hurt.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 72

   Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the
   king's son.

   ^2He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with
   judgment.

   ^3The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills,
   by righteousness.

   ^4He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of
   the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

   ^5They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout
   all generations.

   ^6He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that
   water the earth.

   ^7In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so
   long as the moon endureth.

   ^8He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto
   the ends of the earth.

   ^9They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him; and his
   enemies shall lick the dust.

   ^10The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the
   kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.

   ^11Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve
   him.

   ^12For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and
   him that hath no helper.

   ^13He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the
   needy.

   ^14He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious
   shall their blood be in his sight.

   ^15And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba:
   prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daily shall he be
   praised.

   ^16There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the
   mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon: and they of the
   city shall flourish like grass of the earth.

   ^17His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long
   as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him
   blessed.

   ^18Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous
   things.

   ^19And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth
   be filled with his glory; Amen, and Amen.

   ^20The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 73

   Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

   ^2But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh
   slipped.

   ^3For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the
   wicked.

   ^4For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.

   ^5They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued like
   other men.

   ^6Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth
   them as a garment.

   ^7Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart could
   wish.

   ^8They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they
   speak loftily.

   ^9They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh
   through the earth.

   ^10Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are
   wrung out to them.

   ^11And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the most
   High?

   ^12Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they
   increase in riches.

   ^13Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
   innocency.

   ^14For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every
   morning.

   ^15If I say, I will speak thus; behold, I should offend against the
   generation of thy children.

   ^16When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;

   ^17Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.

   ^18Surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst them
   down into destruction.

   ^19How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are
   utterly consumed with terrors.

   ^20As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou
   shalt despise their image.

   ^21Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.

   ^22So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

   ^23Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my
   right hand.

   ^24Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
   glory.

   ^25Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
   desire beside thee.

   ^26My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart,
   and my portion for ever.

   ^27For, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast
   destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.

   ^28But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in
   the Lord GOD, that I may declare all thy works.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 74

   O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke
   against the sheep of thy pasture?

   ^2Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod
   of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion,
   wherein thou hast dwelt.

   ^3Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations; even all that the
   enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.

   ^4Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up
   their ensigns for signs.

   ^5A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick
   trees.

   ^6But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and
   hammers.

   ^7They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting
   down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.

   ^8They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have
   burned up all the synagogues of God in the land.

   ^9We see not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is there
   among us any that knoweth how long.

   ^10O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy
   blaspheme thy name for ever?

   ^11Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of
   thy bosom.

   ^12For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the
   earth.

   ^13Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of
   the dragons in the waters.

   ^14Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be
   meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.

   ^15Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty
   rivers.

   ^16The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the
   light and the sun.

   ^17Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer
   and winter.

   ^18Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O Lord, and that the
   foolish people have blasphemed thy name.

   ^19O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of the
   wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.

   ^20Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are
   full of the habitations of cruelty.

   ^21O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy
   praise thy name.

   ^22Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
   reproacheth thee daily.

   ^23Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise
   up against thee increaseth continually.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 75

   Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for
   that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.

   ^2When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.

   ^3The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up
   the pillars of it. Selah.

   ^4I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift
   not up the horn:

   ^5Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

   ^6For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor
   from the south.

   ^7But God is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another.

   ^8For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red; it
   is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs
   thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink
   them.

   ^9But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

   ^10All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of
   the righteous shall be exalted.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 76

   In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.

   ^2In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion.

   ^3There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and
   the battle. Selah.

   ^4Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.

   ^5The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none
   of the men of might have found their hands.

   ^6At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast
   into a dead sleep.

   ^7Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight
   when once thou art angry?

   ^8Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared,
   and was still,

   ^9When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.

   ^10Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath
   shalt thou restrain.

   ^11Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him
   bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

   ^12He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings
   of the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 77

   I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and he
   gave ear unto me.

   ^2In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night,
   and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.

   ^3I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was
   overwhelmed. Selah.

   ^4Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.

   ^5I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

   ^6I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own
   heart: and my spirit made diligent search.

   ^7Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more?

   ^8Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore?

   ^9Hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his
   tender mercies? Selah.

   ^10And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of
   the right hand of the most High.

   ^11I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy
   wonders of old.

   ^12I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

   ^13Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our
   God?

   ^14Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength
   among the people.

   ^15Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and
   Joseph. Selah.

   ^16The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they were afraid:
   the depths also were troubled.

   ^17The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine
   arrows also went abroad.

   ^18The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened
   the world: the earth trembled and shook.

   ^19Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy
   footsteps are not known.

   ^20Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 78

   Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my
   mouth.

   ^2I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:

   ^3Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.

   ^4We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation
   to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful
   works that he hath done.

   ^5For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in
   Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them
   known to their children:

   ^6That the generation to come might know them, even the children which
   should be born; who should arise and declare them to their children:

   ^7That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of
   God, but keep his commandments:

   ^8And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious
   generation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose
   spirit was not stedfast with God.

   ^9The children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned back
   in the day of battle.

   ^10They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law;

   ^11And forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them.

   ^12Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land
   of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.

   ^13He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through; and he made the
   waters to stand as an heap.

   ^14In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with
   a light of fire.

   ^15He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of
   the great depths.

   ^16He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run
   down like rivers.

   ^17And they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most High in
   the wilderness.

   ^18And they tempted God in their heart by asking meat for their lust.

   ^19Yea, they spake against God; they said, Can God furnish a table in
   the wilderness?

   ^20Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the
   streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for
   his people?

   ^21Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled
   against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel;

   ^22Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation:

   ^23Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors
   of heaven,

   ^24And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of
   the corn of heaven.

   ^25Man did eat angels' food: he sent them meat to the full.

   ^26He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he
   brought in the south wind.

   ^27He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as
   the sand of the sea:

   ^28And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their
   habitations.

   ^29So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own
   desire;

   ^30They were not estranged from their lust. But while their meat was
   yet in their mouths,

   ^31The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and
   smote down the chosen men of Israel.

   ^32For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous
   works.

   ^33Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in
   trouble.

   ^34When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and
   enquired early after God.

   ^35And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their
   redeemer.

   ^36Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied
   unto him with their tongues.

   ^37For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast
   in his covenant.

   ^38But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and
   destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did
   not stir up all his wrath.

   ^39For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passeth
   away, and cometh not again.

   ^40How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in
   the desert!

   ^41Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of
   Israel.

   ^42They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them
   from the enemy.

   ^43How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field
   of Zoan:

   ^44And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they
   could not drink.

   ^45He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and
   frogs, which destroyed them.

   ^46He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their labour
   unto the locust.

   ^47He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore trees with
   frost.

   ^48He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot
   thunderbolts.

   ^49He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and
   indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them.

   ^50He made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from death, but
   gave their life over to the pestilence;

   ^51And smote all the firstborn in Egypt; the chief of their strength in
   the tabernacles of Ham:

   ^52But made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in
   the wilderness like a flock.

   ^53And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea
   overwhelmed their enemies.

   ^54And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this
   mountain, which his right hand had purchased.

   ^55He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an
   inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
   tents.

   ^56Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his
   testimonies:

   ^57But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they
   were turned aside like a deceitful bow.

   ^58For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him
   to jealousy with their graven images.

   ^59When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel:

   ^60So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he
   placed among men;

   ^61And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the
   enemy's hand.

   ^62He gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with his
   inheritance.

   ^63The fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not given
   to marriage.

   ^64Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no
   lamentation.

   ^65Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that
   shouteth by reason of wine.

   ^66And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a
   perpetual reproach.

   ^67Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the
   tribe of Ephraim:

   ^68But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved.

   ^69And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which
   he hath established for ever.

   ^70He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:

   ^71From following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed
   Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

   ^72So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided
   them by the skilfulness of his hands.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 79

   O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple
   have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.

   ^2The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the
   fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the
   earth.

   ^3Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem; and
   there was none to bury them.

   ^4We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to
   them that are round about us.

   ^5How long, Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn
   like fire?

   ^6Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
   upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.

   ^7For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.

   ^8O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies
   speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.

   ^9Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and
   deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake.

   ^10Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be
   known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of
   thy servants which is shed.

   ^11Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the
   greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die;

   ^12And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their
   reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.

   ^13So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for
   ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 80

   Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock;
   thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.

   ^2Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and
   come and save us.

   ^3Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be
   saved.

   ^4O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer
   of thy people?

   ^5Thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears to
   drink in great measure.

   ^6Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh
   among themselves.

   ^7Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we
   shall be saved.

   ^8Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the
   heathen, and planted it.

   ^9Thou preparedst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep root,
   and it filled the land.

   ^10The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof
   were like the goodly cedars.

   ^11She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the
   river.

   ^12Why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which
   pass by the way do pluck her?

   ^13The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the
   field doth devour it.

   ^14Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and
   behold, and visit this vine;

   ^15And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and the branch
   that thou madest strong for thyself.

   ^16It is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of
   thy countenance.

   ^17Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man
   whom thou madest strong for thyself.

   ^18So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon
   thy name.

   ^19Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we
   shall be saved.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 81

   Sing aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of
   Jacob.

   ^2Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with
   the psaltery.

   ^3Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our
   solemn feast day.

   ^4For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.

   ^5This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through
   the land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.

   ^6I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from
   the pots.

   ^7Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in
   the secret place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meribah.
   Selah.

   ^8Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou
   wilt hearken unto me;

   ^9There shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any
   strange god.

   ^10I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt:
   open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

   ^11But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none
   of me.

   ^12So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked in
   their own counsels.

   ^13Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
   ways!

   ^14I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against
   their adversaries.

   ^15The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him:
   but their time should have endured for ever.

   ^16He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with
   honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 82

   God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the
   gods.

   ^2How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the
   wicked? Selah.

   ^3Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and
   needy.

   ^4Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

   ^5They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in
   darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

   ^6I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most
   High.

   ^7But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

   ^8Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 83

   Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O
   God.

   ^2For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have
   lifted up the head.

   ^3They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted
   against thy hidden ones.

   ^4They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation;
   that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

   ^5For they have consulted together with one consent: they are
   confederate against thee:

   ^6The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the
   Hagarenes;

   ^7Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the inhabitants of
   Tyre;

   ^8Assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of Lot.
   Selah.

   ^9Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at
   the brook of Kison:

   ^10Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.

   ^11Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes
   as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:

   ^12Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.

   ^13O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind.

   ^14As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains
   on fire;

   ^15So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy
   storm.

   ^16Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, O Lord.

   ^17Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put
   to shame, and perish:

   ^18That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the
   most high over all the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 84

   How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!

   ^2My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my
   heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.

   ^3Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for
   herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of
   hosts, my King, and my God.

   ^4Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising
   thee. Selah.

   ^5Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are the
   ways of them.

   ^6Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain also
   filleth the pools.

   ^7They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion
   appeareth before God.

   ^8O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.

   ^9Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.

   ^10For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a
   doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of
   wickedness.

   ^11For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and
   glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

   ^12O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 85

   Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought back
   the captivity of Jacob.

   ^2Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered all
   their sin. Selah.

   ^3Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from the
   fierceness of thine anger.

   ^4Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to
   cease.

   ^5Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger
   to all generations?

   ^6Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

   ^7Shew us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.

   ^8I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace
   unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to
   folly.

   ^9Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell
   in our land.

   ^10Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
   kissed each other.

   ^11Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look
   down from heaven.

   ^12Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good; and our land shall
   yield her increase.

   ^13Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us in the way of
   his steps.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 86

   Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

   ^2Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that
   trusteth in thee.

   ^3Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

   ^4Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up
   my soul.

   ^5For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in
   mercy unto all them that call upon thee.

   ^6Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
   supplications.

   ^7In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer
   me.

   ^8Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are
   there any works like unto thy works.

   ^9All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O
   Lord; and shall glorify thy name.

   ^10For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God alone.

   ^11Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart
   to fear thy name.

   ^12I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
   glorify thy name for evermore.

   ^13For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul
   from the lowest hell.

   ^14O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent
   men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before them.

   ^15But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious,
   longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

   ^16O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
   servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

   ^17Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it, and be
   ashamed: because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 87

   His foundation is in the holy mountains.

   ^2The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
   Jacob.

   ^3Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.

   ^4I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold
   Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there.

   ^5And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and
   the highest himself shall establish her.

   ^6The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man
   was born there. Selah.

   ^7As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all
   my springs are in thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 88

   O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee:

   ^2Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;

   ^3For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the
   grave.

   ^4I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that
   hath no strength:

   ^5Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou
   rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

   ^6Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.

   ^7Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy
   waves. Selah.

   ^8Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made me
   an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

   ^9Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: Lord, I have called daily
   upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

   ^10Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise
   thee? Selah.

   ^11Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy
   faithfulness in destruction?

   ^12Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the
   land of forgetfulness?

   ^13But unto thee have I cried, O Lord; and in the morning shall my
   prayer prevent thee.

   ^14Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from
   me?

   ^15I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy
   terrors I am distracted.

   ^16Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have cut me off.

   ^17They came round about me daily like water; they compassed me about
   together.

   ^18Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance
   into darkness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 89

   I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I
   make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

   ^2For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness
   shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

   ^3I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
   servant,

   ^4Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
   generations. Selah.

   ^5And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord: thy faithfulness
   also in the congregation of the saints.

   ^6For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the
   sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

   ^7God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be
   had in reverence of all them that are about him.

   ^8O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy
   faithfulness round about thee?

   ^9Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
   stillest them.

   ^10Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast
   scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

   ^11The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and
   the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.

   ^12The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon
   shall rejoice in thy name.

   ^13Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right
   hand.

   ^14Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and
   truth shall go before thy face.

   ^15Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
   Lord, in the light of thy countenance.

   ^16In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness
   shall they be exalted.

   ^17For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our horn
   shall be exalted.

   ^18For the Lord is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our king.

   ^19Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid
   help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the
   people.

   ^20I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:

   ^21With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
   strengthen him.

   ^22The enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness
   afflict him.

   ^23And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that
   hate him.

   ^24But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name
   shall his horn be exalted.

   ^25I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
   rivers.

   ^26He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
   salvation.

   ^27Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the
   earth.

   ^28My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
   stand fast with him.

   ^29His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the
   days of heaven.

   ^30If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

   ^31If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

   ^32Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
   iniquity with stripes.

   ^33Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
   suffer my faithfulness to fail.

   ^34My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out
   of my lips.

   ^35Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.

   ^36His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.

   ^37It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
   witness in heaven. Selah.

   ^38But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine
   anointed.

   ^39Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned
   his crown by casting it to the ground.

   ^40Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his strong
   holds to ruin.

   ^41All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his
   neighbours.

   ^42Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made
   all his enemies to rejoice.

   ^43Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him
   to stand in the battle.

   ^44Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the
   ground.

   ^45The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him
   with shame. Selah.

   ^46How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath
   burn like fire?

   ^47Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men in
   vain?

   ^48What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he
   deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

   ^49Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto
   David in thy truth?

   ^50Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my
   bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;

   ^51Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they have
   reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

   ^52Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 90

   Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

   ^2Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed
   the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art
   God.

   ^3Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of
   men.

   ^4For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is
   past, and as a watch in the night.

   ^5Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in the
   morning they are like grass which groweth up.

   ^6In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is
   cut down, and withereth.

   ^7For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.

   ^8Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the
   light of thy countenance.

   ^9For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as
   a tale that is told.

   ^10The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason
   of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and
   sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

   ^11Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so
   is thy wrath.

   ^12So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
   wisdom.

   ^13Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
   servants.

   ^14O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad
   all our days.

   ^15Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us,
   and the years wherein we have seen evil.

   ^16Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
   children.

   ^17And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish
   thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands
   establish thou it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 91

   He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide under
   the shadow of the Almighty.

   ^2I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in
   him will I trust.

   ^3Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from
   the noisome pestilence.

   ^4He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou
   trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

   ^5Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow
   that flieth by day;

   ^6Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the
   destruction that wasteth at noonday.

   ^7A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right
   hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.

   ^8Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the
   wicked.

   ^9Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most
   High, thy habitation;

   ^10There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
   thy dwelling.

   ^11For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
   thy ways.

   ^12They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
   against a stone.

   ^13Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the
   dragon shalt thou trample under feet.

   ^14Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him:
   I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.

   ^15He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
   trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him.

   ^16With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 92

   It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises
   unto thy name, O most High:

   ^2To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness
   every night,

   ^3Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the
   harp with a solemn sound.

   ^4For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in
   the works of thy hands.

   ^5O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

   ^6A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.

   ^7When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of
   iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever:

   ^8But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.

   ^9For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish;
   all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

   ^10But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be
   anointed with fresh oil.

   ^11Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears
   shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

   ^12The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like
   a cedar in Lebanon.

   ^13Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the
   courts of our God.

   ^14They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and
   flourishing;

   ^15To shew that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
   unrighteousness in him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 93

   The Lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with
   strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world also is
   stablished, that it cannot be moved.

   ^2Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

   ^3The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their
   voice; the floods lift up their waves.

   ^4The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than
   the mighty waves of the sea.

   ^5Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, O Lord,
   for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 94

   O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance
   belongeth, shew thyself.

   ^2Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the
   proud.

   ^3Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?

   ^4How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers
   of iniquity boast themselves?

   ^5They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.

   ^6They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

   ^7Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob
   regard it.

   ^8Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye
   be wise?

   ^9He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye,
   shall he not see?

   ^10He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
   teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?

   ^11The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

   ^12Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him
   out of thy law;

   ^13That thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, until the
   pit be digged for the wicked.

   ^14For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake
   his inheritance.

   ^15But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in
   heart shall follow it.

   ^16Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will stand up
   for me against the workers of iniquity?

   ^17Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
   silence.

   ^18When I said, My foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

   ^19In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my
   soul.

   ^20Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
   frameth mischief by a law?

   ^21They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous,
   and condemn the innocent blood.

   ^22But the Lord is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge.

   ^23And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them
   off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 95

   O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the
   rock of our salvation.

   ^2Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful
   noise unto him with psalms.

   ^3For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

   ^4In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the
   hills is his also.

   ^5The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.

   ^6O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our
   maker.

   ^7For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the
   sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his voice,

   ^8Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of
   temptation in the wilderness:

   ^9When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.

   ^10Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is
   a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways:

   ^11Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my
   rest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 96

   O sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth.

   ^2Sing unto the Lord, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from day
   to day.

   ^3Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.

   ^4For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared
   above all gods.

   ^5For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the
   heavens.

   ^6Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his
   sanctuary.

   ^7Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord
   glory and strength.

   ^8Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering,
   and come into his courts.

   ^9O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all
   the earth.

   ^10Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall
   be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people
   righteously.

   ^11Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea
   roar, and the fulness thereof.

   ^12Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the
   trees of the wood rejoice

   ^13Before the Lord: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he
   shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his
   truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 97

   The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be
   glad thereof.

   ^2Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment
   are the habitation of his throne.

   ^3A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.

   ^4His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.

   ^5The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the
   presence of the Lord of the whole earth.

   ^6The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his
   glory.

   ^7Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
   themselves of idols: worship him, all ye gods.

   ^8Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced because
   of thy judgments, O Lord.

   ^9For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far
   above all gods.

   ^10Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his
   saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.

   ^11Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
   heart.

   ^12Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks at the
   remembrance of his holiness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 98

   O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things:
   his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.

   ^2The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he
   openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.

   ^3He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
   Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

   ^4Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise,
   and rejoice, and sing praise.

   ^5Sing unto the Lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a
   psalm.

   ^6With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the
   Lord, the King.

   ^7Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that
   dwell therein.

   ^8Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together

   ^9Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness
   shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 99

   The Lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
   cherubims; let the earth be moved.

   ^2The Lord is great in Zion; and he is high above all the people.

   ^3Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

   ^4The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity,
   thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

   ^5Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is
   holy.

   ^6Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call
   upon his name; they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.

   ^7He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies,
   and the ordinance that he gave them.

   ^8Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest
   them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

   ^9Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the Lord
   our God is holy.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 100

   Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.

   ^2Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing.

   ^3Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not
   we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

   ^4Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
   praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name.

   ^5For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth
   endureth to all generations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 101

   I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

   ^2I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come
   unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

   ^3I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them
   that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.

   ^4A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked
   person.

   ^5Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that
   hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.

   ^6Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
   with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

   ^7He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
   telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.

   ^8I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off
   all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 102

   Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee.

   ^2Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble; incline
   thine ear unto me: in the day when I call answer me speedily.

   ^3For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as an
   hearth.

   ^4My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; so that I forget to eat
   my bread.

   ^5By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin.

   ^6I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the
   desert.

   ^7I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

   ^8Mine enemies reproach me all the day; and they that are mad against
   me are sworn against me.

   ^9For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,

   ^10Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me
   up, and cast me down.

   ^11My days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered like
   grass.

   ^12But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for ever; and thy remembrance unto
   all generations.

   ^13Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour
   her, yea, the set time, is come.

   ^14For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust
   thereof.

   ^15So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of
   the earth thy glory.

   ^16When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.

   ^17He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
   prayer.

   ^18This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people
   which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

   ^19For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from
   heaven did the Lord behold the earth;

   ^20To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are
   appointed to death;

   ^21To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in
   Jerusalem;

   ^22When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve
   the Lord.

   ^23He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.

   ^24I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
   years are throughout all generations.

   ^25Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens
   are the work of thy hands.

   ^26They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax
   old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall
   be changed:

   ^27But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

   ^28The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
   established before thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 103

   Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy
   name.

   ^2Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:

   ^3Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases;

   ^4Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with
   lovingkindness and tender mercies;

   ^5Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is
   renewed like the eagle's.

   ^6The Lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are
   oppressed.

   ^7He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of
   Israel.

   ^8The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in
   mercy.

   ^9He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.

   ^10He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according
   to our iniquities.

   ^11For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
   toward them that fear him.

   ^12As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
   transgressions from us.

   ^13Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that
   fear him.

   ^14For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.

   ^15As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
   flourisheth.

   ^16For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof
   shall know it no more.

   ^17But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
   them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's children;

   ^18To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his
   commandments to do them.

   ^19The Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom
   ruleth over all.

   ^20Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his
   commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.

   ^21Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do
   his pleasure.

   ^22Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless
   the Lord, O my soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 104

   Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art
   clothed with honour and majesty.

   ^2Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out
   the heavens like a curtain:

   ^3Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the
   clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

   ^4Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:

   ^5Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed
   for ever.

   ^6Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood
   above the mountains.

   ^7At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted
   away.

   ^8They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto the
   place which thou hast founded for them.

   ^9Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not
   again to cover the earth.

   ^10He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.

   ^11They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench
   their thirst.

   ^12By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which
   sing among the branches.

   ^13He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with
   the fruit of thy works.

   ^14He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
   service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;

   ^15And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face
   to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.

   ^16The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which
   he hath planted;

   ^17Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees
   are her house.

   ^18The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for
   the conies.

   ^19He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.

   ^20Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the
   forest do creep forth.

   ^21The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.

   ^22The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down
   in their dens.

   ^23Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.

   ^24O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them
   all: the earth is full of thy riches.

   ^25So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
   innumerable, both small and great beasts.

   ^26There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to
   play therein.

   ^27These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in
   due season.

   ^28That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are
   filled with good.

   ^29Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their
   breath, they die, and return to their dust.

   ^30Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest
   the face of the earth.

   ^31The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice
   in his works.

   ^32He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills,
   and they smoke.

   ^33I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to
   my God while I have my being.

   ^34My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.

   ^35Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be
   no more. Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 105

   O give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name: make known his deeds
   among the people.

   ^2Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
   works.

   ^3Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek
   the Lord.

   ^4Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

   ^5Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the
   judgments of his mouth;

   ^6O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen.

   ^7He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth.

   ^8He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded
   to a thousand generations.

   ^9Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac;

   ^10And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an
   everlasting covenant:

   ^11Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your
   inheritance:

   ^12When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers
   in it.

   ^13When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
   another people;

   ^14He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for
   their sakes;

   ^15Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

   ^16Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole
   staff of bread.

   ^17He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant:

   ^18Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:

   ^19Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him.

   ^20The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and let
   him go free.

   ^21He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

   ^22To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.

   ^23Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.

   ^24And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger than
   their enemies.

   ^25He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with his
   servants.

   ^26He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.

   ^27They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.

   ^28He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not against
   his word.

   ^29He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.

   ^30Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of
   their kings.

   ^31He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all
   their coasts.

   ^32He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.

   ^33He smote their vines also and their fig trees; and brake the trees
   of their coasts.

   ^34He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that without
   number,

   ^35And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit
   of their ground.

   ^36He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all
   their strength.

   ^37He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not
   one feeble person among their tribes.

   ^38Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon
   them.

   ^39He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the
   night.

   ^40The people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the
   bread of heaven.

   ^41He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the dry
   places like a river.

   ^42For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.

   ^43And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
   gladness:

   ^44And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the
   labour of the people;

   ^45That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye
   the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 106

   Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for
   his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^2Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can shew forth all his
   praise?

   ^3Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth righteousness
   at all times.

   ^4Remember me, O Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy
   people: O visit me with thy salvation;

   ^5That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
   gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.

   ^6We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have
   done wickedly.

   ^7Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not
   the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at the
   Red sea.

   ^8Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make
   his mighty power to be known.

   ^9He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them
   through the depths, as through the wilderness.

   ^10And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed
   them from the hand of the enemy.

   ^11And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them
   left.

   ^12Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

   ^13They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:

   ^14But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the
   desert.

   ^15And he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their soul.

   ^16They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

   ^17The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of
   Abiram.

   ^18And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up the
   wicked.

   ^19They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

   ^20Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
   eateth grass.

   ^21They forgat God their saviour, which had done great things in Egypt;

   ^22Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red
   sea.

   ^23Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his
   chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
   should destroy them.

   ^24Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word:

   ^25But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the
   Lord.

   ^26Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in
   the wilderness:

   ^27To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them
   in the lands.

   ^28They joined themselves also unto Baalpeor, and ate the sacrifices of
   the dead.

   ^29Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the
   plague brake in upon them.

   ^30Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
   stayed.

   ^31And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations
   for evermore.

   ^32They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill
   with Moses for their sakes:

   ^33Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with
   his lips.

   ^34They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded
   them:

   ^35But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.

   ^36And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

   ^37Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils,

   ^38And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
   daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land
   was polluted with blood.

   ^39Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with
   their own inventions.

   ^40Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people,
   insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.

   ^41And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated
   them ruled over them.

   ^42Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into
   subjection under their hand.

   ^43Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with their
   counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.

   ^44Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry:

   ^45And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to
   the multitude of his mercies.

   ^46He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them
   captives.

   ^47Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to
   give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

   ^48Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting:
   and let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 107

   O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^2Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the
   hand of the enemy;

   ^3And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west,
   from the north, and from the south.

   ^4They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city
   to dwell in.

   ^5Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.

   ^6Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them
   out of their distresses.

   ^7And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city
   of habitation.

   ^8Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
   wonderful works to the children of men!

   ^9For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul with
   goodness.

   ^10Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in
   affliction and iron;

   ^11Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the
   counsel of the most High:

   ^12Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they fell down,
   and there was none to help.

   ^13Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them
   out of their distresses.

   ^14He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake
   their bands in sunder.

   ^15Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
   wonderful works to the children of men!

   ^16For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in
   sunder.

   ^17Fools because of their transgression, and because of their
   iniquities, are afflicted.

   ^18Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near unto the
   gates of death.

   ^19Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saveth them out
   of their distresses.

   ^20He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their
   destructions.

   ^21Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
   wonderful works to the children of men!

   ^22And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare
   his works with rejoicing.

   ^23They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great
   waters;

   ^24These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

   ^25For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the
   waves thereof.

   ^26They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their
   soul is melted because of trouble.

   ^27They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
   their wit's end.

   ^28Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them
   out of their distresses.

   ^29He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.

   ^30Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them unto
   their desired haven.

   ^31Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
   wonderful works to the children of men!

   ^32Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and
   praise him in the assembly of the elders.

   ^33He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the watersprings into dry
   ground;

   ^34A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
   dwell therein.

   ^35He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
   watersprings.

   ^36And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a
   city for habitation;

   ^37And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of
   increase.

   ^38He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly; and
   suffereth not their cattle to decrease.

   ^39Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression,
   affliction, and sorrow.

   ^40He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the
   wilderness, where there is no way.

   ^41Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him
   families like a flock.

   ^42The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop
   her mouth.

   ^43Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall
   understand the lovingkindness of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 108

   O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my
   glory.

   ^2Awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.

   ^3I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing praises
   unto thee among the nations.

   ^4For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto
   the clouds.

   ^5Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all
   the earth;

   ^6That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and
   answer me.

   ^7God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
   Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

   ^8Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of
   mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;

   ^9Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe; over Philistia
   will I triumph.

   ^10Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

   ^11Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O
   God, go forth with our hosts?

   ^12Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

   ^13Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread
   down our enemies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 109

   Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise;

   ^2For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
   against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

   ^3They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against
   me without a cause.

   ^4For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer.

   ^5And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.

   ^6Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right
   hand.

   ^7When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer
   become sin.

   ^8Let his days be few; and let another take his office.

   ^9Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.

   ^10Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek
   their bread also out of their desolate places.

   ^11Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the strangers
   spoil his labour.

   ^12Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any
   to favour his fatherless children.

   ^13Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let
   their name be blotted out.

   ^14Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord; and let
   not the sin of his mother be blotted out.

   ^15Let them be before the Lord continually, that he may cut off the
   memory of them from the earth.

   ^16Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the
   poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

   ^17As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in
   blessing, so let it be far from him.

   ^18As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let
   it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

   ^19Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a
   girdle wherewith he is girded continually.

   ^20Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of
   them that speak evil against my soul.

   ^21But do thou for me, O GOD the Lord, for thy name's sake: because thy
   mercy is good, deliver thou me.

   ^22For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

   ^23I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down
   as the locust.

   ^24My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.

   ^25I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me they
   shaked their heads.

   ^26Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy:

   ^27That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, Lord, hast done
   it.

   ^28Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be
   ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.

   ^29Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover
   themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

   ^30I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him
   among the multitude.

   ^31For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from
   those that condemn his soul.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 110

   The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make
   thine enemies thy footstool.

   ^2The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in
   the midst of thine enemies.

   ^3Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties
   of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy
   youth.

   ^4The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever
   after the order of Melchizedek.

   ^5The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of
   his wrath.

   ^6He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the
   dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.

   ^7He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up
   the head.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 111

   Praise ye the Lord. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the
   assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

   ^2The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
   pleasure therein.

   ^3His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth
   for ever.

   ^4He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is
   gracious and full of compassion.

   ^5He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful
   of his covenant.

   ^6He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give
   them the heritage of the heathen.

   ^7The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments
   are sure.

   ^8They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and
   uprightness.

   ^9He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant
   for ever: holy and reverend is his name.

   ^10The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good
   understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise
   endureth for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 112

   Praise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that
   delighteth greatly in his commandments.

   ^2His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright
   shall be blessed.

   ^3Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness
   endureth for ever.

   ^4Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is gracious,
   and full of compassion, and righteous.

   ^5A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he will guide his affairs
   with discretion.

   ^6Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
   everlasting remembrance.

   ^7He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting
   in the Lord.

   ^8His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his
   desire upon his enemies.

   ^9He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness
   endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honour.

   ^10The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his
   teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 113

   Praise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name
   of the Lord.

   ^2Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for
   evermore.

   ^3From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the Lord'S
   name is to be praised.

   ^4The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.

   ^5Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high,

   ^6Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in
   the earth!

   ^7He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of
   the dunghill;

   ^8That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his
   people.

   ^9He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother
   of children. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 114

   When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of
   strange language;

   ^2Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.

   ^3The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

   ^4The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

   ^5What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that
   thou wast driven back?

   ^6Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like
   lambs?

   ^7Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of
   the God of Jacob;

   ^8Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a
   fountain of waters.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 115

   Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy
   mercy, and for thy truth's sake.

   ^2Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?

   ^3But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath
   pleased.

   ^4Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

   ^5They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see
   not:

   ^6They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell
   not:

   ^7They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk
   not: neither speak they through their throat.

   ^8They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth
   in them.

   ^9O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.

   ^10O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their
   shield.

   ^11Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their
   shield.

   ^12The Lord hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will bless
   the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron.

   ^13He will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great.

   ^14The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.

   ^15Ye are blessed of the Lord which made heaven and earth.

   ^16The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord'S: but the earth hath he
   given to the children of men.

   ^17The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.

   ^18But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.
   Praise the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 116

   I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications.

   ^2Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon
   him as long as I live.

   ^3The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold
   upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.

   ^4Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee,
   deliver my soul.

   ^5Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.

   ^6The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.

   ^7Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully
   with thee.

   ^8For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
   my feet from falling.

   ^9I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

   ^10I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted:

   ^11I said in my haste, All men are liars.

   ^12What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?

   ^13I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
   Lord.

   ^14I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his
   people.

   ^15Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

   ^16O Lord, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of
   thine handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds.

   ^17I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call
   upon the name of the Lord.

   ^18I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his
   people,

   ^19In the courts of the Lord'S house, in the midst of thee, O
   Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 117

   O praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.

   ^2For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the
   Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 118

   O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: because his mercy endureth
   for ever.

   ^2Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^3Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^4Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^5I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me
   in a large place.

   ^6The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me?

   ^7The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see
   my desire upon them that hate me.

   ^8It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man.

   ^9It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.

   ^10All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord will I
   destroy them.

   ^11They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: but in the
   name of the Lord I will destroy them.

   ^12They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of
   thorns: for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.

   ^13Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped
   me.

   ^14The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.

   ^15The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
   righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.

   ^16The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord
   doeth valiantly.

   ^17I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.

   ^18The Lord hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto
   death.

   ^19Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I
   will praise the Lord:

   ^20This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.

   ^21I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my
   salvation.

   ^22The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the
   corner.

   ^23This is the Lord'S doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

   ^24This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be
   glad in it.

   ^25Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now
   prosperity.

   ^26Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed
   you out of the house of the Lord.

   ^27God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice with
   cords, even unto the horns of the altar.

   ^28Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will
   exalt thee.

   ^29O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth
   for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 119

   Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.

   ^2Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with
   the whole heart.

   ^3They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

   ^4Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

   ^5O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

   ^6Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
   commandments.

   ^7I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
   learned thy righteous judgments.

   ^8I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.

   BETH.

   ^9Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
   according to thy word.

   ^10With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
   commandments.

   ^11Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
   thee.

   ^12Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.

   ^13With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

   ^14I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all
   riches.

   ^15I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.

   ^16I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

   GIMEL.

   ^17Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy
   word.

   ^18Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
   law.

   ^19I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.

   ^20My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at
   all times.

   ^21Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
   commandments.

   ^22Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy
   testimonies.

   ^23Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did
   meditate in thy statutes.

   ^24Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.

   DALETH.

   ^25My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy
   word.

   ^26I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy
   statutes.

   ^27Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of
   thy wondrous works.

   ^28My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy
   word.

   ^29Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.

   ^30I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.

   ^31I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, put me not to shame.

   ^32I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my
   heart.

   HE.

   ^33Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto
   the end.

   ^34Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall
   observe it with my whole heart.

   ^35Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I
   delight.

   ^36Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

   ^37Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in
   thy way.

   ^38Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.

   ^39Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.

   ^40Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy
   righteousness.

   VAU.

   ^41Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation,
   according to thy word.

   ^42So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I
   trust in thy word.

   ^43And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have
   hoped in thy judgments.

   ^44So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.

   ^45And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

   ^46I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be
   ashamed.

   ^47And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.

   ^48My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have
   loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.

   ZAIN

   ^49Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me
   to hope.

   ^50This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickened me.

   ^51The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined
   from thy law.

   ^52I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord; and have comforted
   myself.

   ^53Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake
   thy law.

   ^54Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.

   ^55I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy
   law.

   ^56This I had, because I kept thy precepts.

   CHETH.

   ^57Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said that I would keep thy
   words.

   ^58I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me
   according to thy word.

   ^59I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

   ^60I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

   ^61The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
   law.

   ^62At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy
   righteous judgments.

   ^63I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep
   thy precepts.

   ^64The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.

   TETH.

   ^65Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy
   word.

   ^66Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
   commandments.

   ^67Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

   ^68Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.

   ^69The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts
   with my whole heart.

   ^70Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.

   ^71It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy
   statutes.

   ^72The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and
   silver.

   JOD.

   ^73Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that
   I may learn thy commandments.

   ^74They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have
   hoped in thy word.

   ^75I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
   faithfulness hast afflicted me.

   ^76Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according
   to thy word unto thy servant.

   ^77Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is
   my delight.

   ^78Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without
   a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.

   ^79Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known thy
   testimonies.

   ^80Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.

   CAPH.

   ^81My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

   ^82Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?

   ^83For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy
   statutes.

   ^84How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute
   judgment on them that persecute me?

   ^85The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.

   ^86All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully;
   help thou me.

   ^87They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy
   precepts.

   ^88Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the testimony
   of thy mouth.

   LAMED.

   ^89For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.

   ^90Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established the
   earth, and it abideth.

   ^91They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are
   thy servants.

   ^92Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in
   mine affliction.

   ^93I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened
   me.

   ^94I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.

   ^95The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
   testimonies.

   ^96I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is
   exceeding broad.

   MEM.

   ^97O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

   ^98Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies:
   for they are ever with me.

   ^99I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies
   are my meditation.

   ^100I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.

   ^101I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy
   word.

   ^102I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me.

   ^103How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to
   my mouth!

   ^104Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every
   false way.

   NUN.

   ^105Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

   ^106I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
   judgments.

   ^107I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy
   word.

   ^108Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord,
   and teach me thy judgments.

   ^109My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.

   ^110The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy
   precepts.

   ^111Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are
   the rejoicing of my heart.

   ^112I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto
   the end.

   SAMECH.

   ^113I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.

   ^114Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word.

   ^115Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments of
   my God.

   ^116Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not
   be ashamed of my hope.

   ^117Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto
   thy statutes continually.

   ^118Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for
   their deceit is falsehood.

   ^119Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore
   I love thy testimonies.

   ^120My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy
   judgments.

   AIN.

   ^121I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.

   ^122Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.

   ^123Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy
   righteousness.

   ^124Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy
   statutes.

   ^125I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy
   testimonies.

   ^126It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy
   law.

   ^127Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold.

   ^128Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be
   right; and I hate every false way.

   PE.

   ^129Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them.

   ^130The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding
   unto the simple.

   ^131I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.

   ^132Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do
   unto those that love thy name.

   ^133Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion
   over me.

   ^134Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.

   ^135Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes.

   ^136Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law.

   TZADDE.

   ^137Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.

   ^138Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very
   faithful.

   ^139My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy
   words.

   ^140Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it.

   ^141I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.

   ^142Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is
   the truth.

   ^143Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are
   my delights.

   ^144The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
   understanding, and I shall live.

   KOPH.

   ^145I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord: I will keep thy
   statutes.

   ^146I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

   ^147I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy
   word.

   ^148Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy
   word.

   ^149Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness: O Lord, quicken me
   according to thy judgment.

   ^150They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy
   law.

   ^151Thou art near, O Lord; and all thy commandments are truth.

   ^152Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast
   founded them for ever.

   RESH.

   ^153Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy
   law.

   ^154Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.

   ^155Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.

   ^156Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy
   judgments.

   ^157Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from
   thy testimonies.

   ^158I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not
   thy word.

   ^159Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to
   thy lovingkindness.

   ^160Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
   judgments endureth for ever.

   SCHIN.

   ^161Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth
   in awe of thy word.

   ^162I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.

   ^163I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.

   ^164Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous
   judgments.

   ^165Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend
   them.

   ^166Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.

   ^167My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.

   ^168I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are
   before thee.

   TAU.

   ^169Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord: give me understanding
   according to thy word.

   ^170Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy
   word.

   ^171My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes.

   ^172My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are
   righteousness.

   ^173Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.

   ^174I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord; and thy law is my delight.

   ^175Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments
   help me.

   ^176I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I do
   not forget thy commandments.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 120

   In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

   ^2Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
   tongue.

   ^3What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
   false tongue?

   ^4Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.

   ^5Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
   Kedar!

   ^6My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.

   ^7I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 121

   I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help.

   ^2My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.

   ^3He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will
   not slumber.

   ^4Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

   ^5The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

   ^6The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.

   ^7The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy
   soul.

   ^8The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this
   time forth, and even for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 122

   I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the
   Lord.

   ^2Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

   ^3Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:

   ^4Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony
   of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

   ^5For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of
   David.

   ^6Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

   ^7Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

   ^8For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, Peace be
   within thee.

   ^9Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 123

   Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.

   ^2Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,
   and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes
   wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

   ^3Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are
   exceedingly filled with contempt.

   ^4Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at
   ease, and with the contempt of the proud.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 124

   If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say;

   ^2If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up
   against us:

   ^3Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled
   against us:

   ^4Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our
   soul:

   ^5Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.

   ^6Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth.

   ^7Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the
   snare is broken, and we are escaped.

   ^8Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 125

   They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be
   removed, but abideth for ever.

   ^2As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round
   about his people from henceforth even for ever.

   ^3For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the
   righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.

   ^4Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are
   upright in their hearts.

   ^5As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall
   lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon
   Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 126

   When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them
   that dream.

   ^2Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing:
   then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for
   them.

   ^3The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.

   ^4Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south.

   ^5They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

   ^6He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall
   doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 127

   Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it:
   except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

   ^2It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread
   of sorrows: for so he giveth his beloved sleep.

   ^3Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb
   is his reward.

   ^4As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the
   youth.

   ^5Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be
   ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 128

   Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord; that walketh in his ways.

   ^2For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: happy shalt thou be,
   and it shall be well with thee.

   ^3Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy
   children like olive plants round about thy table.

   ^4Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord.

   ^5The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of
   Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

   ^6Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children, and peace upon Israel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 129

   Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:

   ^2Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not
   prevailed against me.

   ^3The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.

   ^4The Lord is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.

   ^5Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.

   ^6Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth afore it
   groweth up:

   ^7Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves
   his bosom.

   ^8Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon
   you: we bless you in the name of the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 130

   Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

   ^2Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
   supplications.

   ^3If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?

   ^4But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.

   ^5I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.

   ^6My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the
   morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

   ^7Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, and
   with him is plenteous redemption.

   ^8And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 131

   Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I
   exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.

   ^2Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned
   of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

   ^3Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 132

   Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions:

   ^2How he sware unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob;

   ^3Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up
   into my bed;

   ^4I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

   ^5Until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty
   God of Jacob.

   ^6Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the
   wood.

   ^7We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.

   ^8Arise, O Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.

   ^9Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints
   shout for joy.

   ^10For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine
   anointed.

   ^11The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David; he will not turn from it;
   Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

   ^12If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall
   teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore.

   ^13For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his
   habitation.

   ^14This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.

   ^15I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with
   bread.

   ^16I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall
   shout aloud for joy.

   ^17There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp
   for mine anointed.

   ^18His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his
   crown flourish.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 133

   Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together
   in unity!

   ^2It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
   the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his
   garments;

   ^3As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
   mountains of Zion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life
   for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 134

   Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night
   stand in the house of the Lord.

   ^2Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord.

   ^3The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 135

   Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the name of the Lord; praise him, O ye
   servants of the Lord.

   ^2Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of
   our God,

   ^3Praise the Lord; for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name;
   for it is pleasant.

   ^4For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his
   peculiar treasure.

   ^5For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all
   gods.

   ^6Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in
   the seas, and all deep places.

   ^7He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he
   maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his
   treasuries.

   ^8Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.

   ^9Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon
   Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.

   ^10Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings;

   ^11Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the
   kingdoms of Canaan:

   ^12And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his
   people.

   ^13Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O Lord,
   throughout all generations.

   ^14For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself
   concerning his servants.

   ^15The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
   hands.

   ^16They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see
   not;

   ^17They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in
   their mouths.

   ^18They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that
   trusteth in them.

   ^19Bless the Lord, O house of Israel: bless the Lord, O house of Aaron:

   ^20Bless the Lord, O house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, bless the
   Lord.

   ^21Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise
   ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 136

   O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^2O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^3O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^4To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^5To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^6To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy
   endureth for ever.

   ^7To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^8The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^9The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^10To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endureth
   for ever:

   ^11And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for
   ever:

   ^12With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy
   endureth for ever.

   ^13To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth
   for ever:

   ^14And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy
   endureth for ever:

   ^15But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy
   endureth for ever.

   ^16To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy
   endureth for ever.

   ^17To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^18And slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^19Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^20And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:

   ^21And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for
   ever:

   ^22Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^23Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for
   ever:

   ^24And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.

   ^25Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.

   ^26O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for
   ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 137

   By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we
   remembered Zion.

   ^2We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.

   ^3For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song;
   and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of
   the songs of Zion.

   ^4How shall we sing the Lord'S song in a strange land?

   ^5If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.

   ^6If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
   mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

   ^7Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who
   said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.

   ^8O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be,
   that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.

   ^9Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against
   the stones.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 138

   I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing
   praise unto thee.

   ^2I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy
   lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word
   above all thy name.

   ^3In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me
   with strength in my soul.

   ^4All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear
   the words of thy mouth.

   ^5Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory
   of the Lord.

   ^6Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the
   proud he knoweth afar off.

   ^7Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou
   shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and
   thy right hand shall save me.

   ^8The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O Lord,
   endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 139

   O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me.

   ^2Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my
   thought afar off.

   ^3Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with
   all my ways.

   ^4For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest
   it altogether.

   ^5Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

   ^6Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain
   unto it.

   ^7Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
   presence?

   ^8If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell,
   behold, thou art there.

   ^9If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts
   of the sea;

   ^10Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

   ^11If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall
   be light about me.

   ^12Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the
   day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

   ^13For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my
   mother's womb.

   ^14I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
   marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.

   ^15My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
   curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

   ^16Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy
   book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned,
   when as yet there was none of them.

   ^17How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the
   sum of them!

   ^18If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: when
   I awake, I am still with thee.

   ^19Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore,
   ye bloody men.

   ^20For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy
   name in vain.

   ^21Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved
   with those that rise up against thee?

   ^22I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

   ^23Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts:

   ^24And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
   everlasting.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 140

   Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent
   man;

   ^2Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they gathered
   together for war.

   ^3They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders' poison is
   under their lips. Selah.

   ^4Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the
   violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

   ^5The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net
   by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah.

   ^6I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my
   supplications, O Lord.

   ^7O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my
   head in the day of battle.

   ^8Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked
   device; lest they exalt themselves. Selah.

   ^9As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of
   their own lips cover them.

   ^10Let burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire;
   into deep pits, that they rise not up again.

   ^11Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt
   the violent man to overthrow him.

   ^12I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and
   the right of the poor.

   ^13Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name: the upright
   shall dwell in thy presence.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 141

   Lord, I cry unto thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when
   I cry unto thee.

   ^2Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up
   of my hands as the evening sacrifice.

   ^3Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.

   ^4Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with
   men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

   ^5Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him
   reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my
   head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.

   ^6When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my
   words; for they are sweet.

   ^7Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth, as when one cutteth and
   cleaveth wood upon the earth.

   ^8But mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the Lord: in thee is my trust;
   leave not my soul destitute.

   ^9Keep me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the gins of
   the workers of iniquity.

   ^10Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal
   escape.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 142

   I cried unto the Lord with my voice; with my voice unto the Lord did I
   make my supplication.

   ^2I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed before him my trouble.

   ^3When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewest my path.
   In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

   ^4I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that
   would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul.

   ^5I cried unto thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion
   in the land of the living.

   ^6Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me from my
   persecutors; for they are stronger than I.

   ^7Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the
   righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with
   me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 143

   Hear my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy
   faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

   ^2And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall
   no man living be justified.

   ^3For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life down
   to the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have
   been long dead.

   ^4Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within me is
   desolate.

   ^5I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on
   the work of thy hands.

   ^6I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsteth after thee, as
   a thirsty land. Selah.

   ^7Hear me speedily, O Lord: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face from
   me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

   ^8Cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning; for in thee do I
   trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my
   soul unto thee.

   ^9Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.

   ^10Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God: thy spirit is good;
   lead me into the land of uprightness.

   ^11Quicken me, O Lord, for thy name's sake: for thy righteousness' sake
   bring my soul out of trouble.

   ^12And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that
   afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 144

   Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my
   fingers to fight:

   ^2My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer; my
   shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under me.

   ^3Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son of
   man, that thou makest account of him!

   ^4Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth away.

   ^5Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they
   shall smoke.

   ^6Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and
   destroy them.

   ^7Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great
   waters, from the hand of strange children;

   ^8Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
   falsehood.

   ^9I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery and an
   instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.

   ^10It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David his
   servant from the hurtful sword.

   ^11Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose
   mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
   falsehood:

   ^12That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our
   daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a
   palace:

   ^13That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that
   our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets:

   ^14That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in,
   nor going out; that there be no complaining in our streets.

   ^15Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that
   people, whose God is the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 145

   I will extol thee, my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for ever
   and ever.

   ^2Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and
   ever.

   ^3Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
   unsearchable.

   ^4One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare
   thy mighty acts.

   ^5I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy
   wondrous works.

   ^6And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will
   declare thy greatness.

   ^7They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and
   shall sing of thy righteousness.

   ^8The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of
   great mercy.

   ^9The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his
   works.

   ^10All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; and thy saints shall bless
   thee.

   ^11They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power;

   ^12To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious
   majesty of his kingdom.

   ^13Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth
   throughout all generations.

   ^14The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that be
   bowed down.

   ^15The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their meat in
   due season.

   ^16Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
   thing.

   ^17The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

   ^18The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call
   upon him in truth.

   ^19He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear
   their cry, and will save them.

   ^20The Lord preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked will
   he destroy.

   ^21My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless
   his holy name for ever and ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 146

   Praise ye the Lord. Praise the Lord, O my soul.

   ^2While I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my God
   while I have any being.

   ^3Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
   is no help.

   ^4His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day
   his thoughts perish.

   ^5Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in
   the Lord his God:

   ^6Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which
   keepeth truth for ever:

   ^7Which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to the
   hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners:

   ^8The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind: the Lord raiseth them that
   are bowed down: the Lord loveth the righteous:

   ^9The Lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and
   widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.

   ^10The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all
   generations. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 147

   Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it
   is pleasant; and praise is comely.

   ^2The Lord doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts
   of Israel.

   ^3He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.

   ^4He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their
   names.

   ^5Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.

   ^6The Lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the
   ground.

   ^7Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto
   our God:

   ^8Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the
   earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.

   ^9He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.

   ^10He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not
   pleasure in the legs of a man.

   ^11The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope
   in his mercy.

   ^12Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.

   ^13For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy
   children within thee.

   ^14He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of
   the wheat.

   ^15He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very
   swiftly.

   ^16He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoar frost like ashes.

   ^17He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his
   cold?

   ^18He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to
   blow, and the waters flow.

   ^19He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto
   Israel.

   ^20He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they
   have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 148

   Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in
   the heights.

   ^2Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.

   ^3Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light.

   ^4Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the
   heavens.

   ^5Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were
   created.

   ^6He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree
   which shall not pass.

   ^7Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps:

   ^8Fire, and hail; snow, and vapours; stormy wind fulfilling his word:

   ^9Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars:

   ^10Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:

   ^11Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the
   earth:

   ^12Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children:

   ^13Let them praise the name of the Lord: for his name alone is
   excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven.

   ^14He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his
   saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise
   ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 149

   Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in
   the congregation of saints.

   ^2Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be
   joyful in their King.

   ^3Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him
   with the timbrel and harp.

   ^4For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek
   with salvation.

   ^5Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their
   beds.

   ^6Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a twoedged sword
   in their hand;

   ^7To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the
   people;

   ^8To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of
   iron;

   ^9To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his
   saints. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 150

   Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the
   firmament of his power.

   ^2Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
   greatness.

   ^3Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the
   psaltery and harp.

   ^4Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
   instruments and organs.

   ^5Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding
   cymbals.

   ^6Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Proverbs
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;

   ^2To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of
   understanding;

   ^3To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
   equity;

   ^4To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and
   discretion.

   ^5A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of
   understanding shall attain unto wise counsels:

   ^6To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the
   wise, and their dark sayings.

   ^7The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise
   wisdom and instruction.

   ^8My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law
   of thy mother:

   ^9For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains
   about thy neck.

   ^10My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.

   ^11If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk
   privily for the innocent without cause:

   ^12Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that
   go down into the pit:

   ^13We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with
   spoil:

   ^14Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse:

   ^15My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from
   their path:

   ^16For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.

   ^17Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.

   ^18And they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their
   own lives.

   ^19So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; which taketh
   away the life of the owners thereof.

   ^20Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets:

   ^21She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
   gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying,

   ^22How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners
   delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?

   ^23Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
   I will make known my words unto you.

   ^24Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand,
   and no man regarded;

   ^25But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my
   reproof:

   ^26I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear
   cometh;

   ^27When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as
   a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.

   ^28Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
   me early, but they shall not find me:

   ^29For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
   Lord:

   ^30They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.

   ^31Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
   filled with their own devices.

   ^32For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the
   prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

   ^33But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet
   from fear of evil.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with
   thee;

   ^2So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to
   understanding;

   ^3Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
   understanding;

   ^4If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
   treasures;

   ^5Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
   knowledge of God.

   ^6For the Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and
   understanding.

   ^7He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them
   that walk uprightly.

   ^8He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his
   saints.

   ^9Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity;
   yea, every good path.

   ^10When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant
   unto thy soul;

   ^11Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:

   ^12To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that
   speaketh froward things;

   ^13Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;

   ^14Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the
   wicked;

   ^15Whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths:

   ^16To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger which
   flattereth with her words;

   ^17Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant
   of her God.

   ^18For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.

   ^19None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
   paths of life.

   ^20That thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of
   the righteous.

   ^21For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall
   remain in it.

   ^22But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the
   transgressors shall be rooted out of it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments:

   ^2For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.

   ^3Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write
   them upon the table of thine heart:

   ^4So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God
   and man.

   ^5Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own
   understanding.

   ^6In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

   ^7Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

   ^8It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.

   ^9Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all
   thine increase:

   ^10So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
   burst out with new wine.

   ^11My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of
   his correction:

   ^12For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in
   whom he delighteth.

   ^13Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth
   understanding.

   ^14For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver,
   and the gain thereof than fine gold.

   ^15She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst
   desire are not to be compared unto her.

   ^16Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and
   honour.

   ^17Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

   ^18She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is
   every one that retaineth her.

   ^19The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he
   established the heavens.

   ^20By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down
   the dew.

   ^21My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and
   discretion:

   ^22So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.

   ^23Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not
   stumble.

   ^24When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie
   down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

   ^25Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the
   wicked, when it cometh.

   ^26For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
   being taken.

   ^27Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
   power of thine hand to do it.

   ^28Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will
   give; when thou hast it by thee.

   ^29Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely
   by thee.

   ^30Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.

   ^31Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.

   ^32For the froward is abomination to the Lord: but his secret is with
   the righteous.

   ^33The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth
   the habitation of the just.

   ^34Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly.

   ^35The wise shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of
   fools.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know
   understanding.

   ^2For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.

   ^3For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my
   mother.

   ^4He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words:
   keep my commandments, and live.

   ^5Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from
   the words of my mouth.

   ^6Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall
   keep thee.

   ^7Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy
   getting get understanding.

   ^8Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to
   honour, when thou dost embrace her.

   ^9She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory
   shall she deliver to thee.

   ^10Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life
   shall be many.

   ^11I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right
   paths.

   ^12When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou
   runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

   ^13Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she is
   thy life.

   ^14Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
   men.

   ^15Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.

   ^16For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep
   is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

   ^17For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
   violence.

   ^18But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more
   and more unto the perfect day.

   ^19The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they
   stumble.

   ^20My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.

   ^21Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine
   heart.

   ^22For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their
   flesh.

   ^23Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of
   life.

   ^24Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from
   thee.

   ^25Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight
   before thee.

   ^26Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.

   ^27Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from
   evil.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my understanding:

   ^2That thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy lips may keep
   knowledge.

   ^3For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth
   is smoother than oil:

   ^4But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a twoedged sword.

   ^5Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.

   ^6Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable,
   that thou canst not know them.

   ^7Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words
   of my mouth.

   ^8Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:

   ^9Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the
   cruel:

   ^10Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth; and thy labours be in the
   house of a stranger;

   ^11And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are
   consumed,

   ^12And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
   reproof;

   ^13And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear
   to them that instructed me!

   ^14I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and
   assembly.

   ^15Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of
   thine own well.

   ^16Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the
   streets.

   ^17Let them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee.

   ^18Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.

   ^19Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts
   satisfy thee at all times; and be thou ravished always with her love.

   ^20And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and
   embrace the bosom of a stranger?

   ^21For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
   pondereth all his goings.

   ^22His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be
   holden with the cords of his sins.

   ^23He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his folly
   he shall go astray.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken thy
   hand with a stranger,

   ^2Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the
   words of thy mouth.

   ^3Do this now, my son, deliver thyself, when thou art come into the
   hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend.

   ^4Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.

   ^5Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird
   from the hand of the fowler.

   ^6Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise:

   ^7Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,

   ^8Provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the
   harvest.

   ^9How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy
   sleep?

   ^10Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
   to sleep:

   ^11So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an
   armed man.

   ^12A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth.

   ^13He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth
   with his fingers;

   ^14Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth mischief continually; he
   soweth discord.

   ^15Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be
   broken without remedy.

   ^16These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination
   unto him:

   ^17A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,

   ^18An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in
   running to mischief,

   ^19A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among
   brethren.

   ^20My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of
   thy mother:

   ^21Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.

   ^22When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall
   keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.

   ^23For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of
   instruction are the way of life:

   ^24To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of
   a strange woman.

   ^25Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee
   with her eyelids.

   ^26For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
   bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.

   ^27Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?

   ^28Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?

   ^29So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife; whosoever toucheth her
   shall not be innocent.

   ^30Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he
   is hungry;

   ^31But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all
   the substance of his house.

   ^32But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he
   that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.

   ^33A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be
   wiped away.

   ^34For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in
   the day of vengeance.

   ^35He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though
   thou givest many gifts.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.

   ^2Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye.

   ^3Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart.

   ^4Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy
   kinswoman:

   ^5That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger
   which flattereth with her words.

   ^6For at the window of my house I looked through my casement,

   ^7And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a
   young man void of understanding,

   ^8Passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to
   her house,

   ^9In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night:

   ^10And, behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and
   subtil of heart.

   ^11(She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house:

   ^12Now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every
   corner.)

   ^13So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said
   unto him,

   ^14I have peace offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows.

   ^15Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face,
   and I have found thee.

   ^16I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works,
   with fine linen of Egypt.

   ^17I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.

   ^18Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace
   ourselves with loves.

   ^19For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey:

   ^20He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day
   appointed.

   ^21With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
   flattering of her lips she forced him.

   ^22He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or
   as a fool to the correction of the stocks;

   ^23Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the
   snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life.

   ^24Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the
   words of my mouth.

   ^25Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.

   ^26For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been
   slain by her.

   ^27Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?

   ^2She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of
   the paths.

   ^3She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in
   at the doors.

   ^4Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice is to the sons of man.

   ^5O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an
   understanding heart.

   ^6Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my
   lips shall be right things.

   ^7For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to
   my lips.

   ^8All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing
   froward or perverse in them.

   ^9They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that
   find knowledge.

   ^10Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than
   choice gold.

   ^11For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be
   desired are not to be compared to it.

   ^12I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty
   inventions.

   ^13The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the
   evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.

   ^14Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have
   strength.

   ^15By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.

   ^16By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.

   ^17I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find
   me.

   ^18Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and
   righteousness.

   ^19My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue
   than choice silver.

   ^20I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
   judgment:

   ^21That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will
   fill their treasures.

   ^22The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works
   of old.

   ^23I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
   was.

   ^24When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no
   fountains abounding with water.

   ^25Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought
   forth:

   ^26While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the
   highest part of the dust of the world.

   ^27When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass
   upon the face of the depth:

   ^28When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the
   fountains of the deep:

   ^29When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass
   his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth:

   ^30Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his
   delight, rejoicing always before him;

   ^31Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were
   with the sons of men.

   ^32Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed are they
   that keep my ways.

   ^33Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.

   ^34Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates,
   waiting at the posts of my doors.

   ^35For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the
   Lord.

   ^36But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that
   hate me love death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars:

   ^2She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also
   furnished her table.

   ^3She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places
   of the city,

   ^4Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth
   understanding, she saith to him,

   ^5Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.

   ^6Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.

   ^7He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that
   rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.

   ^8Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he
   will love thee.

   ^9Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a
   just man, and he will increase in learning.

   ^10The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge
   of the holy is understanding.

   ^11For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life
   shall be increased.

   ^12If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but if thou
   scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.

   ^13A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.

   ^14For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
   places of the city,

   ^15To call passengers who go right on their ways:

   ^16Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him that wanteth
   understanding, she saith to him,

   ^17Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

   ^18But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are
   in the depths of hell.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish
   son is the heaviness of his mother.

   ^2Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivereth
   from death.

   ^3The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he
   casteth away the substance of the wicked.

   ^4He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of the
   diligent maketh rich.

   ^5He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth in
   harvest is a son that causeth shame.

   ^6Blessings are upon the head of the just: but violence covereth the
   mouth of the wicked.

   ^7The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall
   rot.

   ^8The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall
   fall.

   ^9He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth his
   ways shall be known.

   ^10He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool
   shall fall.

   ^11The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: but violence
   covereth the mouth of the wicked.

   ^12Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.

   ^13In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a
   rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.

   ^14Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near
   destruction.

   ^15The rich man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the
   poor is their poverty.

   ^16The labour of the righteous tendeth to life: the fruit of the wicked
   to sin.

   ^17He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that
   refuseth reproof erreth.

   ^18He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a
   slander, is a fool.

   ^19In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that
   refraineth his lips is wise.

   ^20The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wicked
   is little worth.

   ^21The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of
   wisdom.

   ^22The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow
   with it.

   ^23It is as sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding
   hath wisdom.

   ^24The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire of
   the righteous shall be granted.

   ^25As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the
   righteous is an everlasting foundation.

   ^26As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the
   sluggard to them that send him.

   ^27The fear of the Lord prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked
   shall be shortened.

   ^28The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of
   the wicked shall perish.

   ^29The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: but destruction
   shall be to the workers of iniquity.

   ^30The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not
   inhabit the earth.

   ^31The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue
   shall be cut out.

   ^32The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of
   the wicked speaketh frowardness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his
   delight.

   ^2When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly is wisdom.

   ^3The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness
   of transgressors shall destroy them.

   ^4Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth
   from death.

   ^5The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked
   shall fall by his own wickedness.

   ^6The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but
   transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

   ^7When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the hope
   of unjust men perisheth.

   ^8The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in
   his stead.

   ^9An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through
   knowledge shall the just be delivered.

   ^10When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when
   the wicked perish, there is shouting.

   ^11By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is
   overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

   ^12He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of
   understanding holdeth his peace.

   ^13A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit
   concealeth the matter.

   ^14Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of
   counsellors there is safety.

   ^15He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that
   hateth suretiship is sure.

   ^16A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.

   ^17The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but he that is cruel
   troubleth his own flesh.

   ^18The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth
   righteousness shall be a sure reward.

   ^19As righteousness tendeth to life: so he that pursueth evil pursueth
   it to his own death.

   ^20They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord: but
   such as are upright in their way are his delight.

   ^21Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but
   the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.

   ^22As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which is
   without discretion.

   ^23The desire of the righteous is only good: but the expectation of the
   wicked is wrath.

   ^24There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that
   withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.

   ^25The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall be
   watered also himself.

   ^26He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing
   shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.

   ^27He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: but he that
   seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.

   ^28He that trusteth in his riches shall fall: but the righteous shall
   flourish as a branch.

   ^29He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool
   shall be servant to the wise of heart.

   ^30The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth
   souls is wise.

   ^31Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more
   the wicked and the sinner.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof
   is brutish.

   ^2A good man obtaineth favour of the Lord: but a man of wicked devices
   will he condemn.

   ^3A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the
   righteous shall not be moved.

   ^4A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that maketh
   ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.

   ^5The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the
   wicked are deceit.

   ^6The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth
   of the upright shall deliver them.

   ^7The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house of the
   righteous shall stand.

   ^8A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is of a
   perverse heart shall be despised.

   ^9He that is despised, and hath a servant, is better than he that
   honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.

   ^10A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender
   mercies of the wicked are cruel.

   ^11He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that
   followeth vain persons is void of understanding.

   ^12The wicked desireth the net of evil men: but the root of the
   righteous yieldeth fruit.

   ^13The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: but the just
   shall come out of trouble.

   ^14A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth: and
   the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.

   ^15The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth
   unto counsel is wise.

   ^16A fool's wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covereth shame.

   ^17He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false
   witness deceit.

   ^18There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue
   of the wise is health.

   ^19The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue
   is but for a moment.

   ^20Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the
   counsellors of peace is joy.

   ^21There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be
   filled with mischief.

   ^22Lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are
   his delight.

   ^23A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
   proclaimeth foolishness.

   ^24The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the slothful shall be
   under tribute.

   ^25Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word
   maketh it glad.

   ^26The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour: but the way of
   the wicked seduceth them.

   ^27The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but the
   substance of a diligent man is precious.

   ^28In the way of righteousness is life; and in the pathway thereof
   there is no death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   A wise son heareth his father's instruction: but a scorner heareth not
   rebuke.

   ^2A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the
   transgressors shall eat violence.

   ^3He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: but he that openeth wide
   his lips shall have destruction.

   ^4The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul of
   the diligent shall be made fat.

   ^5A righteous man hateth lying: but a wicked man is loathsome, and
   cometh to shame.

   ^6Righteousness keepeth him that is upright in the way: but wickedness
   overthroweth the sinner.

   ^7There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is that
   maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.

   ^8The ransom of a man's life are his riches: but the poor heareth not
   rebuke.

   ^9The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked
   shall be put out.

   ^10Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised is
   wisdom.

   ^11Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished: but he that gathereth
   by labour shall increase.

   ^12Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it
   is a tree of life.

   ^13Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the
   commandment shall be rewarded.

   ^14The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares
   of death.

   ^15Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgressors is
   hard.

   ^16Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open his
   folly.

   ^17A wicked messenger falleth into mischief: but a faithful ambassador
   is health.

   ^18Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction: but he
   that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.

   ^19The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination
   to fools to depart from evil.

   ^20He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of
   fools shall be destroyed.

   ^21Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be repaid.

   ^22A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children: and
   the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.

   ^23Much food is in the tillage of the poor: but there is that is
   destroyed for want of judgment.

   ^24He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him
   chasteneth him betimes.

   ^25The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of
   the wicked shall want.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down
   with her hands.

   ^2He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the Lord: but he that is
   perverse in his ways despiseth him.

   ^3In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: but the lips of the
   wise shall preserve them.

   ^4Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the
   strength of the ox.

   ^5A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies.

   ^6A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowledge is easy
   unto him that understandeth.

   ^7Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in
   him the lips of knowledge.

   ^8The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the folly of
   fools is deceit.

   ^9Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is favour.

   ^10The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not
   intermeddle with his joy.

   ^11The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of
   the upright shall flourish.

   ^12There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof
   are the ways of death.

   ^13Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth
   is heaviness.

   ^14The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a
   good man shall be satisfied from himself.

   ^15The simple believeth every word: but the prudent man looketh well to
   his going.

   ^16A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth,
   and is confident.

   ^17He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked devices
   is hated.

   ^18The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with
   knowledge.

   ^19The evil bow before the good; and the wicked at the gates of the
   righteous.

   ^20The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich hath many
   friends.

   ^21He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: but he that hath mercy on
   the poor, happy is he.

   ^22Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be to
   them that devise good.

   ^23In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips tendeth only
   to penury.

   ^24The crown of the wise is their riches: but the foolishness of fools
   is folly.

   ^25A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful witness speaketh
   lies.

   ^26In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and his children shall
   have a place of refuge.

   ^27The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the
   snares of death.

   ^28In the multitude of people is the king's honour: but in the want of
   people is the destruction of the prince.

   ^29He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is
   hasty of spirit exalteth folly.

   ^30A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy the rottenness of
   the bones.

   ^31He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker: but he that
   honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.

   ^32The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath
   hope in his death.

   ^33Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but that
   which is in the midst of fools is made known.

   ^34Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any
   people.

   ^35The king's favour is toward a wise servant: but his wrath is against
   him that causeth shame.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.

   ^2The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools
   poureth out foolishness.

   ^3The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the
   good.

   ^4A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is a
   breach in the spirit.

   ^5A fool despiseth his father's instruction: but he that regardeth
   reproof is prudent.

   ^6In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the revenues
   of the wicked is trouble.

   ^7The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish
   doeth not so.

   ^8The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the
   prayer of the upright is his delight.

   ^9The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord: but he loveth
   him that followeth after righteousness.

   ^10Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: and he that
   hateth reproof shall die.

   ^11Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more then the
   hearts of the children of men?

   ^12A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither will he go unto
   the wise.

   ^13A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the
   heart the spirit is broken.

   ^14The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge: but the
   mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.

   ^15All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry
   heart hath a continual feast.

   ^16Better is little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and
   trouble therewith.

   ^17Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and
   hatred therewith.

   ^18A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to anger
   appeaseth strife.

   ^19The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of
   the righteous is made plain.

   ^20A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his
   mother.

   ^21Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of
   understanding walketh uprightly.

   ^22Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of
   counsellors they are established.

   ^23A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due
   season, how good is it!

   ^24The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell
   beneath.

   ^25The Lord will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish
   the border of the widow.

   ^26The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: but the
   words of the pure are pleasant words.

   ^27He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that
   hateth gifts shall live.

   ^28The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the
   wicked poureth out evil things.

   ^29The Lord is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the
   righteous.

   ^30The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: and a good report maketh
   the bones fat.

   ^31The ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise.

   ^32He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that
   heareth reproof getteth understanding.

   ^33The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom; and before honour
   is humility.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is
   from the Lord.

   ^2All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord
   weigheth the spirits.

   ^3Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
   established.

   ^4The Lord hath made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked for
   the day of evil.

   ^5Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord:
   though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

   ^6By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the Lord
   men depart from evil.

   ^7When a man's ways please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be
   at peace with him.

   ^8Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues without
   right.

   ^9A man's heart deviseth his way: but the Lord directeth his steps.

   ^10A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth
   transgresseth not in judgment.

   ^11A just weight and balance are the Lord'S: all the weights of the bag
   are his work.

   ^12It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the throne
   is established by righteousness.

   ^13Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that
   speaketh right.

   ^14The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise man will
   pacify it.

   ^15In the light of the king's countenance is life; and his favour is as
   a cloud of the latter rain.

   ^16How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get
   understanding rather to be chosen than silver!

   ^17The highway of the upright is to depart from evil: he that keepeth
   his way preserveth his soul.

   ^18Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.

   ^19Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to
   divide the spoil with the proud.

   ^20He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and whoso trusteth
   in the Lord, happy is he.

   ^21The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the
   lips increaseth learning.

   ^22Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but the
   instruction of fools is folly.

   ^23The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his
   lips.

   ^24Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to
   the bones.

   ^25There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof
   are the ways of death.

   ^26He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth it of
   him.

   ^27An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a
   burning fire.

   ^28A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief
   friends.

   ^29A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way
   that is not good.

   ^30He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he
   bringeth evil to pass.

   ^31The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
   righteousness.

   ^32He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
   ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.

   ^33The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of
   the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of
   sacrifices with strife.

   ^2A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and
   shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.

   ^3The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the Lord
   trieth the hearts.

   ^4A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; and a liar giveth ear to a
   naughty tongue.

   ^5Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad at
   calamities shall not be unpunished.

   ^6Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of
   children are their fathers.

   ^7Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less do lying lips a
   prince.

   ^8A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it:
   whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.

   ^9He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth
   a matter separateth very friends.

   ^10A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes into
   a fool.

   ^11An evil man seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger
   shall be sent against him.

   ^12Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in
   his folly.

   ^13Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.

   ^14The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water: therefore
   leave off contention, before it be meddled with.

   ^15He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even
   they both are abomination to the Lord.

   ^16Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
   seeing he hath no heart to it?

   ^17A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.

   ^18A man void of understanding striketh hands, and becometh surety in
   the presence of his friend.

   ^19He loveth transgression that loveth strife: and he that exalteth his
   gate seeketh destruction.

   ^20He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a
   perverse tongue falleth into mischief.

   ^21He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow: and the father of a
   fool hath no joy.

   ^22A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth
   the bones.

   ^23A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of
   judgment.

   ^24Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool
   are in the ends of the earth.

   ^25A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that
   bare him.

   ^26Also to punish the just is not good, nor to strike princes for
   equity.

   ^27He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of understanding
   is of an excellent spirit.

   ^28Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that
   shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and
   intermeddleth with all wisdom.

   ^2A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may
   discover itself.

   ^3When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy
   reproach.

   ^4The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring of
   wisdom as a flowing brook.

   ^5It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the
   righteous in judgment.

   ^6A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for
   strokes.

   ^7A fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his
   soul.

   ^8The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the
   innermost parts of the belly.

   ^9He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a
   great waster.

   ^10The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into
   it, and is safe.

   ^11The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high wall in his
   own conceit.

   ^12Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honour is
   humility.

   ^13He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and
   shame unto him.

   ^14The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit
   who can bear?

   ^15The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise
   seeketh knowledge.

   ^16A man's gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men.

   ^17He that is first in his own cause seemeth just; but his neighbour
   cometh and searcheth him.

   ^18The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the
   mighty.

   ^19A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and their
   contentions are like the bars of a castle.

   ^20A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; and
   with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.

   ^21Death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they that love it
   shall eat the fruit thereof.

   ^22Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of
   the Lord.

   ^23The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.

   ^24A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a
   friend that sticketh closer than a brother.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is
   perverse in his lips, and is a fool.

   ^2Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he that
   hasteth with his feet sinneth.

   ^3The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth
   against the Lord.

   ^4Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor is separated from his
   neighbour.

   ^5A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies
   shall not escape.

   ^6Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man is a friend
   to him that giveth gifts.

   ^7All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his
   friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet they are
   wanting to him.

   ^8He that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul: he that keepeth
   understanding shall find good.

   ^9A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies
   shall perish.

   ^10Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to have
   rule over princes.

   ^11The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and it is his glory to
   pass over a transgression.

   ^12The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is as
   dew upon the grass.

   ^13A foolish son is the calamity of his father: and the contentions of
   a wife are a continual dropping.

   ^14House and riches are the inheritance of fathers and a prudent wife
   is from the Lord.

   ^15Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall
   suffer hunger.

   ^16He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; but he that
   despiseth his ways shall die.

   ^17He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord; and that
   which he hath given will he pay him again.

   ^18Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for
   his crying.

   ^19A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver
   him, yet thou must do it again.

   ^20Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in
   thy latter end.

   ^21There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the counsel of
   the Lord, that shall stand.

   ^22The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is better than a
   liar.

   ^23The fear of the Lord tendeth to life: and he that hath it shall
   abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil.

   ^24A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as
   bring it to his mouth again.

   ^25Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one that
   hath understanding, and he will understand knowledge.

   ^26He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son
   that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.

   ^27Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to err from the
   words of knowledge.

   ^28An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked
   devoureth iniquity.

   ^29Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
   fools.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived
   thereby is not wise.

   ^2The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh him
   to anger sinneth against his own soul.

   ^3It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will
   be meddling.

   ^4The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shall he
   beg in harvest, and have nothing.

   ^5Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of
   understanding will draw it out.

   ^6Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man
   who can find?

   ^7The just man walketh in his integrity: his children are blessed after
   him.

   ^8A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all
   evil with his eyes.

   ^9Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?

   ^10Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them are alike
   abomination to the Lord.

   ^11Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and
   whether it be right.

   ^12The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of
   them.

   ^13Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou
   shalt be satisfied with bread.

   ^14It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his
   way, then he boasteth.

   ^15There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge
   are a precious jewel.

   ^16Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a pledge of
   him for a strange woman.

   ^17Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be
   filled with gravel.

   ^18Every purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make
   war.

   ^19He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore
   meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips.

   ^20Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in
   obscure darkness.

   ^21An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end
   thereof shall not be blessed.

   ^22Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he
   shall save thee.

   ^23Divers weights are an abomination unto the Lord; and a false balance
   is not good.

   ^24Man's goings are of the Lord; how can a man then understand his own
   way?

   ^25It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after
   vows to make enquiry.

   ^26A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them.

   ^27The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the
   inward parts of the belly.

   ^28Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by
   mercy.

   ^29The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men
   is the grey head.

   ^30The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripes the
   inward parts of the belly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   The king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he
   turneth it whithersoever he will.

   ^2Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth
   the hearts.

   ^3To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than
   sacrifice.

   ^4An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is
   sin.

   ^5The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of every
   one that is hasty only to want.

   ^6The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to and
   fro of them that seek death.

   ^7The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to
   do judgment.

   ^8The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his work
   is right.

   ^9It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
   brawling woman in a wide house.

   ^10The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no
   favour in his eyes.

   ^11When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the
   wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.

   ^12The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked: but
   God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.

   ^13Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
   himself, but shall not be heard.

   ^14A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong
   wrath.

   ^15It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be to
   the workers of iniquity.

   ^16The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain
   in the congregation of the dead.

   ^17He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine and
   oil shall not be rich.

   ^18The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor
   for the upright.

   ^19It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and
   an angry woman.

   ^20There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the wise;
   but a foolish man spendeth it up.

   ^21He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life,
   righteousness, and honour.

   ^22A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the
   strength of the confidence thereof.

   ^23Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from
   troubles.

   ^24Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath.

   ^25The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to
   labour.

   ^26He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth and
   spareth not.

   ^27The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he
   bringeth it with a wicked mind?

   ^28A false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh
   constantly.

   ^29A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he
   directeth his way.

   ^30There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord.

   ^31The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety is of
   the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour
   rather than silver and gold.

   ^2The rich and poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all.

   ^3A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple
   pass on, and are punished.

   ^4By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honour, and
   life.

   ^5Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that doth keep
   his soul shall be far from them.

   ^6Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will
   not depart from it.

   ^7The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
   lender.

   ^8He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger
   shall fail.

   ^9He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his
   bread to the poor.

   ^10Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife and
   reproach shall cease.

   ^11He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the king
   shall be his friend.

   ^12The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the
   words of the transgressor.

   ^13The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall be slain in
   the streets.

   ^14The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the
   Lord shall fall therein.

   ^15Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
   correction shall drive it far from him.

   ^16He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, and he that
   giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.

   ^17Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine
   heart unto my knowledge.

   ^18For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall
   withal be fitted in thy lips.

   ^19That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this
   day, even to thee.

   ^20Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and
   knowledge,

   ^21That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth;
   that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto
   thee?

   ^22Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted
   in the gate:

   ^23For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those
   that spoiled them.

   ^24Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou
   shalt not go:

   ^25Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.

   ^26Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are
   sureties for debts.

   ^27If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from
   under thee?

   ^28Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.

   ^29Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
   kings; he shall not stand before mean men.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is
   before thee:

   ^2And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.

   ^3Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat.

   ^4Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.

   ^5Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly
   make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven.

   ^6Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire
   thou his dainty meats:

   ^7For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, saith he to
   thee; but his heart is not with thee.

   ^8The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy
   sweet words.

   ^9Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of
   thy words.

   ^10Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the
   fatherless:

   ^11For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.

   ^12Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of
   knowledge.

   ^13Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with
   the rod, he shall not die.

   ^14Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from
   hell.

   ^15My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.

   ^16Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.

   ^17Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the
   Lord all the day long.

   ^18For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be cut
   off.

   ^19Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.

   ^20Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh:

   ^21For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and
   drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.

   ^22Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother
   when she is old.

   ^23Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and
   understanding.

   ^24The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that
   begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him.

   ^25Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
   shall rejoice.

   ^26My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.

   ^27For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow pit.

   ^28She also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the
   transgressors among men.

   ^29Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
   babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?

   ^30They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine.

   ^31Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his
   colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.

   ^32At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.

   ^33Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter
   perverse things.

   ^34Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or
   as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.

   ^35They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have
   beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet
   again.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them.

   ^2For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
   mischief.

   ^3Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is
   established:

   ^4And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and
   pleasant riches.

   ^5A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.

   ^6For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of
   counsellors there is safety.

   ^7Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the gate.

   ^8He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person.

   ^9The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is an abomination
   to men.

   ^10If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.

   ^11If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those
   that are ready to be slain;

   ^12If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth
   the heart consider it? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know
   it? and shall not he render to every man according to his works?

   ^13My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; and the honeycomb, which
   is sweet to thy taste:

   ^14So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou hast
   found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not
   be cut off.

   ^15Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous;
   spoil not his resting place:

   ^16For a just man falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the
   wicked shall fall into mischief.

   ^17Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be
   glad when he stumbleth:

   ^18Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his
   wrath from him.

   ^19Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the
   wicked;

   ^20For there shall be no reward to the evil man; the candle of the
   wicked shall be put out.

   ^21My son, fear thou the Lord and the king: and meddle not with them
   that are given to change:

   ^22For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of
   them both?

   ^23These things also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect
   of persons in judgment.

   ^24He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the
   people curse, nations shall abhor him:

   ^25But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing
   shall come upon them.

   ^26Every man shall kiss his lips that giveth a right answer.

   ^27Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field;
   and afterwards build thine house.

   ^28Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive
   not with thy lips.

   ^29Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will render to
   the man according to his work.

   ^30I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man
   void of understanding;

   ^31And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered
   the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.

   ^32Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and received
   instruction.

   ^33Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
   to sleep:

   ^34So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth; and thy want as an
   armed man.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of
   Judah copied out.

   ^2It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings is
   to search out a matter.

   ^3The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
   kings is unsearchable.

   ^4Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
   vessel for the finer.

   ^5Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be
   established in righteousness.

   ^6Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in
   the place of great men:

   ^7For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither; than that
   thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine
   eyes have seen.

   ^8Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the
   end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.

   ^9Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a
   secret to another:

   ^10Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not
   away.

   ^11A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

   ^12As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
   reprover upon an obedient ear.

   ^13As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful
   messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his
   masters.

   ^14Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind
   without rain.

   ^15By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh
   the bone.

   ^16Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest
   thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.

   ^17Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour's house; lest he be weary of
   thee, and so hate thee.

   ^18A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a maul,
   and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

   ^19Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken
   tooth, and a foot out of joint.

   ^20As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
   upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart.

   ^21If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
   thirsty, give him water to drink:

   ^22For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall
   reward thee.

   ^23The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a
   backbiting tongue.

   ^24It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a
   brawling woman and in a wide house.

   ^25As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
   country.

   ^26A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled
   fountain, and a corrupt spring.

   ^27It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own
   glory is not glory.

   ^28He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is
   broken down, and without walls.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly for
   a fool.

   ^2As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
   causeless shall not come.

   ^3A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool's
   back.

   ^4Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto
   him.

   ^5Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
   conceit.

   ^6He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the feet,
   and drinketh damage.

   ^7The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth of
   fools.

   ^8As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to
   a fool.

   ^9As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in
   the mouth of fools.

   ^10The great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool, and
   rewardeth transgressors.

   ^11As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his folly.

   ^12Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a
   fool than of him.

   ^13The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the
   streets.

   ^14As the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon his
   bed.

   ^15The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to bring
   it again to his mouth.

   ^16The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can
   render a reason.

   ^17He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him,
   is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.

   ^18As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,

   ^19So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in
   sport?

   ^20Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no
   talebearer, the strife ceaseth.

   ^21As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious
   man to kindle strife.

   ^22The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the
   innermost parts of the belly.

   ^23Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with
   silver dross.

   ^24He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit
   within him;

   ^25When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there are seven
   abominations in his heart.

   ^26Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be shewed
   before the whole congregation.

   ^27Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone,
   it will return upon him.

   ^28A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it; and a
   flattering mouth worketh ruin.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may
   bring forth.

   ^2Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and
   not thine own lips.

   ^3A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's wrath is heavier
   than them both.

   ^4Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand
   before envy?

   ^5Open rebuke is better than secret love.

   ^6Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are
   deceitful.

   ^7The full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every
   bitter thing is sweet.

   ^8As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth
   from his place.

   ^9Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of a
   man's friend by hearty counsel.

   ^10Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither go
   into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a
   neighbour that is near than a brother far off.

   ^11My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that
   reproacheth me.

   ^12A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple
   pass on, and are punished.

   ^13Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of
   him for a strange woman.

   ^14He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the
   morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.

   ^15A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are
   alike.

   ^16Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right
   hand, which bewrayeth itself.

   ^17Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
   friend.

   ^18Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that
   waiteth on his master shall be honoured.

   ^19As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.

   ^20Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are never
   satisfied.

   ^21As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man
   to his praise.

   ^22Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
   pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

   ^23Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to
   thy herds.

   ^24For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every
   generation?

   ^25The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of
   the mountains are gathered.

   ^26The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of the
   field.

   ^27And thou shalt have goats' milk enough for thy food, for the food of
   thy household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a
   lion.

   ^2For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof: but by
   a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be
   prolonged.

   ^3A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which
   leaveth no food.

   ^4They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the law
   contend with them.

   ^5Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the Lord
   understand all things.

   ^6Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that is
   perverse in his ways, though he be rich.

   ^7Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion of
   riotous men shameth his father.

   ^8He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall
   gather it for him that will pity the poor.

   ^9He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer
   shall be abomination.

   ^10Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall
   fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good things
   in possession.

   ^11The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the poor that hath
   understanding searcheth him out.

   ^12When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when the
   wicked rise, a man is hidden.

   ^13He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth
   and forsaketh them shall have mercy.

   ^14Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his heart
   shall fall into mischief.

   ^15As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the
   poor people.

   ^16The prince that wanteth understanding is also a great oppressor: but
   he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.

   ^17A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall flee to
   the pit; let no man stay him.

   ^18Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but he that is perverse in
   his ways shall fall at once.

   ^19He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that
   followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough.

   ^20A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh haste
   to be rich shall not be innocent.

   ^21To have respect of persons is not good: for for a piece of bread
   that man will transgress.

   ^22He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not
   that poverty shall come upon him.

   ^23He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he
   that flattereth with the tongue.

   ^24Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no
   transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.

   ^25He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that putteth
   his trust in the Lord shall be made fat.

   ^26He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh
   wisely, he shall be delivered.

   ^27He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth his
   eyes shall have many a curse.

   ^28When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the
   righteous increase.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be
   destroyed, and that without remedy.

   ^2When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the
   wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.

   ^3Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that keepeth company
   with harlots spendeth his substance.

   ^4The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth
   gifts overthroweth it.

   ^5A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet.

   ^6In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the
   righteous doth sing and rejoice.

   ^7The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked
   regardeth not to know it.

   ^8Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away wrath.

   ^9If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or
   laugh, there is no rest.

   ^10The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.

   ^11A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man keepeth it in till
   afterwards.

   ^12If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked.

   ^13The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the Lord lighteneth
   both their eyes.

   ^14The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be
   established for ever.

   ^15The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself
   bringeth his mother to shame.

   ^16When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: but the
   righteous shall see their fall.

   ^17Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give
   delight unto thy soul.

   ^18Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the
   law, happy is he.

   ^19A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand
   he will not answer.

   ^20Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a
   fool than of him.

   ^21He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have
   him become his son at the length.

   ^22An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in
   transgression.

   ^23A man's pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the
   humble in spirit.

   ^24Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth
   cursing, and bewrayeth it not.

   ^25The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the
   Lord shall be safe.

   ^26Many seek the ruler's favour; but every man's judgment cometh from
   the Lord.

   ^27An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright
   in the way is abomination to the wicked.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake
   unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,

   ^2Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding
   of a man.

   ^3I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.

   ^4Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the
   wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath
   established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is
   his son's name, if thou canst tell?

   ^5Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their
   trust in him.

   ^6Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found
   a liar.

   ^7Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before I die:

   ^8Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor
   riches; feed me with food convenient for me:

   ^9Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be
   poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.

   ^10Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou
   be found guilty.

   ^11There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not bless
   their mother.

   ^12There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is
   not washed from their filthiness.

   ^13There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids
   are lifted up.

   ^14There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw
   teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy
   from among men.

   ^15The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are
   three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is
   enough:

   ^16The grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not filled with
   water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough.

   ^17The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his
   mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
   eagles shall eat it.

   ^18There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four
   which I know not:

   ^19The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock;
   the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a
   maid.

   ^20Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her
   mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.

   ^21For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
   cannot bear:

   ^22For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with
   meat;

   ^23For an odious woman when she is married; and an handmaid that is
   heir to her mistress.

   ^24There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they are
   exceeding wise:

   ^25The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the
   summer;

   ^26The conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the
   rocks;

   ^27The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;

   ^28The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces.

   ^29There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely in going:

   ^30A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for
   any;

   ^31A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom there is no
   rising up.

   ^32If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast
   thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.

   ^33Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing
   of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth
   forth strife.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.

   ^2What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my
   vows?

   ^3Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which
   destroyeth kings.

   ^4It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine; nor
   for princes strong drink:

   ^5Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any
   of the afflicted.

   ^6Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
   those that be of heavy hearts.

   ^7Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
   more.

   ^8Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are appointed
   to destruction.

   ^9Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor
   and needy.

   ^10Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.

   ^11The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall
   have no need of spoil.

   ^12She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.

   ^13She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.

   ^14She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food from afar.

   ^15She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her
   household, and a portion to her maidens.

   ^16She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands
   she planteth a vineyard.

   ^17She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms.

   ^18She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle goeth not
   out by night.

   ^19She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.

   ^20She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her
   hands to the needy.

   ^21She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her
   household are clothed with scarlet.

   ^22She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and
   purple.

   ^23Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders
   of the land.

   ^24She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles unto
   the merchant.

   ^25Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time
   to come.

   ^26She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of
   kindness.

   ^27She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the
   bread of idleness.

   ^28Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and
   he praiseth her.

   ^29Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

   ^30Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth
   the Lord, she shall be praised.

   ^31Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her
   in the gates.
     __________________________________________________________________

Ecclesiastes;

  or, The Preacher
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.

   ^2Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is
   vanity.

   ^3What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the
   sun?

   ^4One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh: but the
   earth abideth for ever.

   ^5The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his
   place where he arose.

   ^6The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it
   whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to
   his circuits.

   ^7All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the
   place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.

   ^8All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not
   satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.

   ^9The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which
   is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under
   the sun.

   ^10Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it hath
   been already of old time, which was before us.

   ^11There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any
   remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come
   after.

   ^12I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.

   ^13And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all
   things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to
   the sons of man to be exercised therewith.

   ^14I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold,
   all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

   ^15That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is
   wanting cannot be numbered.

   ^16I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great
   estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before
   me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and
   knowledge.

   ^17And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I
   perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.

   ^18For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge
   increaseth sorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
   therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.

   ^2I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?

   ^3I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine
   heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was
   that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven
   all the days of their life.

   ^4I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:

   ^5I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all
   kind of fruits:

   ^6I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth
   forth trees:

   ^7I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house;
   also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that
   were in Jerusalem before me:

   ^8I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
   kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and
   the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of
   all sorts.

   ^9So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
   Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

   ^10And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld
   not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and
   this was my portion of all my labour.

   ^11Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the
   labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and
   vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

   ^12And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for
   what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath
   been already done.

   ^13Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth
   darkness.

   ^14The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
   darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them
   all.

   ^15Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
   happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my
   heart, that this also is vanity.

   ^16For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for
   ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall all be
   forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.

   ^17Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the
   sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

   ^18Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because
   I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.

   ^19And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall
   he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I
   have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.

   ^20Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
   labour which I took under the sun.

   ^21For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and
   in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave
   it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.

   ^22For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his
   heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?

   ^23For all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart
   taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity.

   ^24There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and
   drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This
   also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.

   ^25For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I?

   ^26For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and
   knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and
   to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also
   is vanity and vexation of spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
   heaven:

   ^2A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to
   pluck up that which is planted;

   ^3A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time
   to build up;

   ^4A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to
   dance;

   ^5A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a
   time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;

   ^6A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast
   away;

   ^7A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time
   to speak;

   ^8A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of
   peace.

   ^9What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?

   ^10I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to
   be exercised in it.

   ^11He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the
   world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God
   maketh from the beginning to the end.

   ^12I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and
   to do good in his life.

   ^13And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of
   all his labour, it is the gift of God.

   ^14I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can
   be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that men
   should fear before him.

   ^15That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
   been; and God requireth that which is past.

   ^16And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
   wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
   there.

   ^17I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked:
   for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work.

   ^18I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that
   God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves
   are beasts.

   ^19For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one
   thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they
   have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast:
   for all is vanity.

   ^20All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
   again.

   ^21Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of
   the beast that goeth downward to the earth?

   ^22Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man
   should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall
   bring him to see what shall be after him?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under
   the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had
   no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but
   they had no comforter.

   ^2Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the
   living which are yet alive.

   ^3Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who hath
   not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.

   ^4Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for this
   a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and vexation of
   spirit.

   ^5The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.

   ^6Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with
   travail and vexation of spirit.

   ^7Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.

   ^8There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither
   child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour; neither is
   his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom do I labour,
   and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore
   travail.

   ^9Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their
   labour.

   ^10For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him
   that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up.

   ^11Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be
   warm alone?

   ^12And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
   threefold cord is not quickly broken.

   ^13Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king, who
   will no more be admonished.

   ^14For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is born
   in his kingdom becometh poor.

   ^15I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
   second child that shall stand up in his stead.

   ^16There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been before
   them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this
   also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to
   hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that
   they do evil.

   ^2Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter
   any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
   therefore let thy words be few.

   ^3For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool's
   voice is known by multitude of words.

   ^4When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no
   pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.

   ^5Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
   vow and not pay.

   ^6Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
   before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry
   at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?

   ^7For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers
   vanities: but fear thou God.

   ^8If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of
   judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for he
   that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than
   they.

   ^9Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
   served by the field.

   ^10He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he
   that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.

   ^11When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good
   is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
   eyes?

   ^12The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or
   much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.

   ^13There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches
   kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.

   ^14But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son, and
   there is nothing in his hand.

   ^15As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return to go
   as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry
   away in his hand.

   ^16And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
   shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?

   ^17All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow and
   wrath with his sickness.

   ^18Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to eat
   and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he taketh
   under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it is
   his portion.

   ^19Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath
   given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice
   in his labour; this is the gift of God.

   ^20For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because God
   answereth him in the joy of his heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common
   among men:

   ^2A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so that he
   wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth, yet God giveth
   him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eateth it: this is vanity,
   and it is an evil disease.

   ^3If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the
   days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good, and
   also that he have no burial; I say, that an untimely birth is better
   than he.

   ^4For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his name
   shall be covered with darkness.

   ^5Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this hath
   more rest than the other.

   ^6Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he seen no
   good: do not all go to one place?

   ^7All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not
   filled.

   ^8For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor, that
   knoweth to walk before the living?

   ^9Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire:
   this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.

   ^10That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is
   man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.

   ^11Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the
   better?

   ^12For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of
   his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man
   what shall be after him under the sun?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   A good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than
   the day of one's birth.

   ^2It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house
   of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it
   to his heart.

   ^3Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance
   the heart is made better.

   ^4The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of
   fools is in the house of mirth.

   ^5It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear
   the song of fools.

   ^6For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the
   fool: this also is vanity.

   ^7Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the
   heart.

   ^8Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and the
   patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

   ^9Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the
   bosom of fools.

   ^10Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better
   than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.

   ^11Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
   them that see the sun.

   ^12For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the excellency
   of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it.

   ^13Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he
   hath made crooked?

   ^14In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity
   consider: God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end
   that man should find nothing after him.

   ^15All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just man
   that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
   prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

   ^16Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why
   shouldest thou destroy thyself?

   ^17Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou
   die before thy time?

   ^18It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from
   this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth
   of them all.

   ^19Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are in
   the city.

   ^20For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth
   not.

   ^21Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear thy
   servant curse thee:

   ^22For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself
   likewise hast cursed others.

   ^23All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it was
   far from me.

   ^24That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?

   ^25I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom,
   and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly, even of
   foolishness and madness:

   ^26And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is snares
   and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shall escape from
   her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.

   ^27Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one,
   to find out the account:

   ^28Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand
   have I found; but a woman among all those have I not found.

   ^29Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they
   have sought out many inventions.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing?
   a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of his face
   shall be changed.

   ^2I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in regard of
   the oath of God.

   ^3Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing; for
   he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.

   ^4Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto
   him, What doest thou?

   ^5Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a wise
   man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.

   ^6Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the
   misery of man is great upon him.

   ^7For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when it
   shall be?

   ^8There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit;
   neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in
   that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.

   ^9All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is
   done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over another
   to his own hurt.

   ^10And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place
   of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had so
   done: this is also vanity.

   ^11Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
   therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

   ^12Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged,
   yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which
   fear before him:

   ^13But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
   his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before God.

   ^14There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just
   men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again,
   there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the
   righteous: I said that this also is vanity.

   ^15Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the
   sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide
   with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under
   the sun.

   ^16When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
   that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
   night seeth sleep with his eyes:)

   ^17Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the
   work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to seek it
   out, yet he shall not find it; yea further; though a wise man think to
   know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that
   the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God:
   no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.

   ^2All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous,
   and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to
   him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good,
   so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.

   ^3This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that
   there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is
   full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after
   that they go to the dead.

   ^4For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a
   living dog is better than a dead lion.

   ^5For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
   thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is
   forgotten.

   ^6Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished;
   neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done
   under the sun.

   ^7Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
   heart; for God now accepteth thy works.

   ^8Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.

   ^9Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life
   of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of
   thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour
   which thou takest under the sun.

   ^10Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there
   is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
   whither thou goest.

   ^11I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
   swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor
   yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but
   time and chance happeneth to them all.

   ^12For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in
   an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the
   sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them.

   ^13This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great unto
   me:

   ^14There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came a
   great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks
   against it:

   ^15Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom
   delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man.

   ^16Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the poor
   man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.

   ^17The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of him
   that ruleth among fools.

   ^18Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroyeth much
   good.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a
   stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for
   wisdom and honour.

   ^2A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at his
   left.

   ^3Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom
   faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.

   ^4If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place;
   for yielding pacifieth great offences.

   ^5There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error which
   proceedeth from the ruler:

   ^6Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.

   ^7I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants
   upon the earth.

   ^8He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an
   hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

   ^9Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that cleaveth
   wood shall be endangered thereby.

   ^10If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put
   to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.

   ^11Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a babbler is
   no better.

   ^12The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fool
   will swallow up himself.

   ^13The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and the end
   of his talk is mischievous madness.

   ^14A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and
   what shall be after him, who can tell him?

   ^15The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he
   knoweth not how to go to the city.

   ^16Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat
   in the morning!

   ^17Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and
   thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!

   ^18By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through idleness of
   the hands the house droppeth through.

   ^19A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
   answereth all things.

   ^20Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in
   thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
   which hath wings shall tell the matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days.

   ^2Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not what
   evil shall be upon the earth.

   ^3If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth:
   and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the
   place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.

   ^4He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the
   clouds shall not reap.

   ^5As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones
   do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou knowest not
   the works of God who maketh all.

   ^6In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine
   hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that,
   or whether they both shall be alike good.

   ^7Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
   behold the sun:

   ^8But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him
   remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh
   is vanity.

   ^9Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in
   the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
   sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will
   bring thee into judgment.

   ^10Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy
   flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days
   come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no
   pleasure in them;

   ^2While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not
   darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:

   ^3In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the
   strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they
   are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,

   ^4And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the
   grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all
   the daughters of musick shall be brought low;

   ^5Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall
   be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper
   shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long
   home, and the mourners go about the streets:

   ^6Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or
   the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the
   cistern.

   ^7Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
   shall return unto God who gave it.

   ^8Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.

   ^9And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the
   people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
   order many proverbs.

   ^10The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that which was
   written was upright, even words of truth.

   ^11The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
   masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

   ^12And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books
   there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

   ^13Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep
   his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

   ^14For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
   thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The

Song of Solomon
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 1

   The song of songs, which is Solomon's.

   ^2Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better
   than wine.

   ^3Because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as ointment
   poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

   ^4Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
   chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
   love more than wine: the upright love thee.

   ^5I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of
   Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

   ^6Look not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked
   upon me: my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the
   keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept.

   ^7Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where thou
   makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that
   turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?

   ^8If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the
   footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents.

   ^9I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh's
   chariots.

   ^10Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of
   gold.

   ^11We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

   ^12While the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth the
   smell thereof.

   ^13A bundle of myrrh is my wellbeloved unto me; he shall lie all night
   betwixt my breasts.

   ^14My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of
   Engedi.

   ^15Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
   doves' eyes.

   ^16Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is
   green.

   ^17The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 2

   I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys.

   ^2As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

   ^3As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
   the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
   was sweet to my taste.

   ^4He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
   love.

   ^5Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am sick of love.

   ^6His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me.

   ^7I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
   hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
   please.

   ^8The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the
   mountains, skipping upon the hills.

   ^9My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth behind
   our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, shewing himself through the
   lattice.

   ^10My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one,
   and come away.

   ^11For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone;

   ^12The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is
   come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land;

   ^13The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the
   tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come
   away.

   ^14O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places
   of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for
   sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.

   ^15Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for our
   vines have tender grapes.

   ^16My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies.

   ^17Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved,
   and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 3

   By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but
   I found him not.

   ^2I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the
   broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I
   found him not.

   ^3The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye
   him whom my soul loveth?

   ^4It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
   soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought
   him into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her that conceived
   me.

   ^5I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
   hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
   please.

   ^6Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
   perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?

   ^7Behold his bed, which is Solomon's; threescore valiant men are about
   it, of the valiant of Israel.

   ^8They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his sword
   upon his thigh because of fear in the night.

   ^9King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

   ^10He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold,
   the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love,
   for the daughters of Jerusalem.

   ^11Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the
   crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and
   in the day of the gladness of his heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 4

   Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves'
   eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear
   from mount Gilead.

   ^2Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came
   up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren
   among them.

   ^3Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy
   temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

   ^4Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon
   there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

   ^5Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed
   among the lilies.

   ^6Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
   mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

   ^7Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.

   ^8Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look from
   the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lions'
   dens, from the mountains of the leopards.

   ^9Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished
   my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

   ^10How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy
   love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices!

   ^11Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
   under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of
   Lebanon.

   ^12A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a
   fountain sealed.

   ^13Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;
   camphire, with spikenard,

   ^14Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of
   frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices:

   ^15A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
   Lebanon.

   ^16Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, that
   the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden,
   and eat his pleasant fruits.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 5

   I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my
   myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have
   drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
   abundantly, O beloved.

   ^2I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that
   knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
   undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
   of the night.

   ^3I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet;
   how shall I defile them?

   ^4My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels
   were moved for him.

   ^5I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped with myrrh, and
   my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.

   ^6I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was
   gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not find
   him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.

   ^7The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me, they
   wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

   ^8I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that
   ye tell him, that I am sick of love.

   ^9What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among
   women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou dost so
   charge us?

   ^10My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

   ^11His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as
   a raven.

   ^12His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed
   with milk, and fitly set.

   ^13His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like
   lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

   ^14His hands are as gold rings set with the beryl: his belly is as
   bright ivory overlaid with sapphires.

   ^15His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold:
   his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.

   ^16His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
   beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 6

   Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy
   beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

   ^2My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to
   feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

   ^3I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the
   lilies.

   ^4Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
   terrible as an army with banners.

   ^5Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair is
   as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

   ^6Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing,
   whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among
   them.

   ^7As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.

   ^8There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins
   without number.

   ^9My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother,
   she is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and
   blessed her; yea, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her.

   ^10Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
   clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?

   ^11I went down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley,
   and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.

   ^12Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadib.

   ^13Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look upon
   thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two
   armies.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 7

   How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince's daughter! the joints
   of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning
   workman.

   ^2Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy belly
   is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.

   ^3Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.

   ^4Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in
   Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of
   Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.

   ^5Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like
   purple; the king is held in the galleries.

   ^6How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!

   ^7This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters
   of grapes.

   ^8I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs
   thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the
   smell of thy nose like apples;

   ^9And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that
   goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

   ^10I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me.

   ^11Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in
   the villages.

   ^12Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the vine
   flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud
   forth: there will I give thee my loves.

   ^13The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
   pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
   beloved.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Song of Solomon 8

   O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother!
   when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, I should not
   be despised.

   ^2I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who would
   instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of
   my pomegranate.

   ^3His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
   embrace me.

   ^4I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
   awake my love, until he please.

   ^5Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
   beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother
   brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

   ^6Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love
   is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof
   are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.

   ^7Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a
   man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
   utterly be contemned.

   ^8We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do
   for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?

   ^9If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if
   she be a door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.

   ^10I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as
   one that found favour.

   ^11Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; he let out the vineyard unto
   keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces
   of silver.

   ^12My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must have
   a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.

   ^13Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
   voice: cause me to hear it.

   ^14Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart
   upon the mountains of spices.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of the Prophet

Isaiah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and
   Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of
   Judah.

   ^2Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I
   have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
   me.

   ^3The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel
   doth not know, my people doth not consider.

   ^4Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers,
   children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have
   provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away
   backward.

   ^5Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: the
   whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

   ^6From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in
   it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been
   closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.

   ^7Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your
   land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as
   overthrown by strangers.

   ^8And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a
   lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

   ^9Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we
   should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.

   ^10Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law
   of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

   ^11To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith
   the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed
   beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of
   he goats.

   ^12When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your
   hand, to tread my courts?

   ^13Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the
   new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with;
   it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

   ^14Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a
   trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

   ^15And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you:
   yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of
   blood.

   ^16Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from
   before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

   ^17Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
   fatherless, plead for the widow.

   ^18Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your
   sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
   like crimson, they shall be as wool.

   ^19If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:

   ^20But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for
   the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

   ^21How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment;
   righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.

   ^22Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water:

   ^23Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one
   loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the
   fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.

   ^24Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of
   Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
   enemies:

   ^25And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross,
   and take away all thy tin:

   ^26And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors
   as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of
   righteousness, the faithful city.

   ^27Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with
   righteousness.

   ^28And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be
   together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.

   ^29For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye
   shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.

   ^30For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
   hath no water.

   ^31And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark, and
   they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and
   Jerusalem.

   ^2And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
   Lord'S house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
   shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

   ^3And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
   mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
   teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion
   shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

   ^4And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people:
   and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into
   pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither
   shall they learn war any more.

   ^5O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.

   ^6Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because
   they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the
   Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers.

   ^7Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end
   of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there
   any end of their chariots:

   ^8Their land also is full of idols; they worship the work of their own
   hands, that which their own fingers have made:

   ^9And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself:
   therefore forgive them not.

   ^10Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the
   Lord, and for the glory of his majesty.

   ^11The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men
   shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

   ^12For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is
   proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be
   brought low:

   ^13And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and
   upon all the oaks of Bashan,

   ^14And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are
   lifted up,

   ^15And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,

   ^16And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

   ^17And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of
   men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

   ^18And the idols he shall utterly abolish.

   ^19And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of
   the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when
   he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

   ^20In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of
   gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and
   to the bats;

   ^21To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged
   rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he
   ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

   ^22Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is
   he to be accounted of?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem
   and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the
   whole stay of water,

   ^2The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and
   the prudent, and the ancient,

   ^3The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counsellor, and
   the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator.

   ^4And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule
   over them.

   ^5And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every
   one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against
   the ancient, and the base against the honourable.

   ^6When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father,
   saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be
   under thy hand:

   ^7In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in
   my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the
   people.

   ^8For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue
   and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his
   glory.

   ^9The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they
   declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for
   they have rewarded evil unto themselves.

   ^10Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they
   shall eat the fruit of their doings.

   ^11Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his
   hands shall be given him.

   ^12As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over
   them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy
   the way of thy paths.

   ^13The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.

   ^14The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people,
   and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil
   of the poor is in your houses.

   ^15What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
   of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

   ^16Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty,
   and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and
   mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:

   ^17Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of
   the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts.

   ^18In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling
   ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like
   the moon,

   ^19The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,

   ^20The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and
   the tablets, and the earrings,

   ^21The rings, and nose jewels,

   ^22The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples,
   and the crisping pins,

   ^23The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.

   ^24And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall
   be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair
   baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and
   burning instead of beauty.

   ^25Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.

   ^26And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate shall
   sit upon the ground.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will
   eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by
   thy name, to take away our reproach.

   ^2In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious,
   and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that
   are escaped of Israel.

   ^3And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that
   remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is
   written among the living in Jerusalem:

   ^4When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of
   Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst
   thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

   ^5And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and
   upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
   flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.

   ^6And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the
   heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from
   rain.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his
   vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:

   ^2And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it
   with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also
   made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth
   grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

   ^3And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray
   you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

   ^4What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done
   in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
   brought it forth wild grapes?

   ^5And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will
   take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down
   the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down:

   ^6And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but
   there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds
   that they rain no rain upon it.

   ^7For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the
   men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold
   oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

   ^8Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till
   there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the
   earth!

   ^9In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be
   desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.

   ^10Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an
   homer shall yield an ephah.

   ^11Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
   follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them!

   ^12And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in
   their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither
   consider the operation of his hands.

   ^13Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no
   knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude
   dried up with thirst.

   ^14Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without
   measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he
   that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

   ^15And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be
   humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled:

   ^16But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is
   holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.

   ^17Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places
   of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

   ^18Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it
   were with a cart rope:

   ^19That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see
   it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come,
   that we may know it!

   ^20Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness
   for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet
   for bitter!

   ^21Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
   own sight!

   ^22Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
   mingle strong drink:

   ^23Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness
   of the righteous from him!

   ^24Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth
   the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom
   shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the Lord of
   hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.

   ^25Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and
   he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them:
   and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of
   the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
   stretched out still.

   ^26And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss
   unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with
   speed swiftly:

   ^27None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor
   sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the
   latchet of their shoes be broken:

   ^28Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs
   shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:

   ^29Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young
   lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry
   it away safe, and none shall deliver it.

   ^30And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the
   sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, and the
   light is darkened in the heavens thereof.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a
   throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.

   ^2Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he
   covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he
   did fly.

   ^3And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord
   of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

   ^4And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and
   the house was filled with smoke.

   ^5Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
   unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for
   mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.

   ^6Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his
   hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar:

   ^7And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy
   lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

   ^8Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and
   who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.

   ^9And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand
   not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.

   ^10Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
   shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
   ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

   ^11Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be
   wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be
   utterly desolate,

   ^12And the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great
   forsaking in the midst of the land.

   ^13But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
   eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when
   they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance
   thereof.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of
   Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son
   of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against
   it, but could not prevail against it.

   ^2And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with
   Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the
   trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

   ^3Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and
   Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in
   the highway of the fuller's field;

   ^4And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be
   fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the
   fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah.

   ^5Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil
   counsel against thee, saying,

   ^6Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach
   therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of
   Tabeal:

   ^7Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to
   pass.

   ^8For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin;
   and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it
   be not a people.

   ^9And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
   Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
   established.

   ^10Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying,

   ^11Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depth, or
   in the height above.

   ^12But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.

   ^13And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing for
   you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?

   ^14Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin
   shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

   ^15Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil,
   and choose the good.

   ^16For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the
   good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.

   ^17The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy
   father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim
   departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.

   ^18And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss for
   the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for
   the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

   ^19And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate
   valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon
   all bushes.

   ^20In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired,
   namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and
   the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard.

   ^21And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a
   young cow, and two sheep;

   ^22And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall
   give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that
   is left in the land.

   ^23And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be,
   where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall
   even be for briers and thorns.

   ^24With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the
   land shall become briers and thorns.

   ^25And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall
   not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the
   sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Moreover the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it
   with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

   ^2And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest,
   and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

   ^3And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son.
   Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

   ^4For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my
   mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken
   away before the king of Assyria.

   ^5The Lord spake also unto me again, saying,

   ^6Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go
   softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son;

   ^7Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of
   the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his
   glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his
   banks:

   ^8And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he
   shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall
   fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.

   ^9Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
   and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be
   broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.

   ^10Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word,
   and it shall not stand: for God is with us.

   ^11For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me
   that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying,

   ^12Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall
   say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

   ^13Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and
   let him be your dread.

   ^14And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and
   for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a
   snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

   ^15And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be
   snared, and be taken.

   ^16Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

   ^17And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house
   of Jacob, and I will look for him.

   ^18Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs
   and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in
   mount Zion.

   ^19And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar
   spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a
   people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?

   ^20To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
   word, it is because there is no light in them.

   ^21And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it
   shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
   themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.

   ^22And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness,
   dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when
   at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of
   Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of
   the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations.

   ^2The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that
   dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light
   shined.

   ^3Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they joy
   before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when
   they divide the spoil.

   ^4For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his
   shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.

   ^5For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments
   rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.

   ^6For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
   government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
   Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
   Prince of Peace.

   ^7Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
   upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
   establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
   ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.

   ^8The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.

   ^9And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of
   Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,

   ^10The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the
   sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars.

   ^11Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against
   him, and join his enemies together;

   ^12The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shall
   devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned
   away, but his hand is stretched out still.

   ^13For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do
   they seek the Lord of hosts.

   ^14Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch
   and rush, in one day.

   ^15The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that
   teacheth lies, he is the tail.

   ^16For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are
   led of them are destroyed.

   ^17Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither
   shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an
   hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this
   his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

   ^18For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers and
   thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall
   mount up like the lifting up of smoke.

   ^19Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the
   people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
   brother.

   ^20And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall
   eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat
   every man the flesh of his own arm:

   ^21Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be
   against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand
   is stretched out still.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
   grievousness which they have prescribed;

   ^2To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right
   from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that
   they may rob the fatherless!

   ^3And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation
   which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where
   will ye leave your glory?

   ^4Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall
   fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but
   his hand is stretched out still.

   ^5O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is
   mine indignation.

   ^6I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the
   people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to
   take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.

   ^7Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is
   in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

   ^8For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings?

   ^9Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as
   Damascus?

   ^10As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven
   images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;

   ^11Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to
   Jerusalem and her idols?

   ^12Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed
   his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the
   fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his
   high looks.

   ^13For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
   wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people,
   and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants
   like a valiant man:

   ^14And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as
   one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and
   there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.

   ^15Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or
   shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod
   should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff
   should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.

   ^16Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones
   leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the
   burning of a fire.

   ^17And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a
   flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one
   day;

   ^18And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful
   field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standardbearer
   fainteth.

   ^19And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child
   may write them.

   ^20And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel,
   and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay
   upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of
   Israel, in truth.

   ^21The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty
   God.

   ^22For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
   remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow
   with righteousness.

   ^23For the Lord GOD of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined,
   in the midst of all the land.

   ^24Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, O my people that
   dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee
   with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner
   of Egypt.

   ^25For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and
   mine anger in their destruction.

   ^26And the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to
   the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon
   the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.

   ^27And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be
   taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
   the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

   ^28He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath
   laid up his carriages:

   ^29They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at
   Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.

   ^30Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto
   Laish, O poor Anathoth.

   ^31Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to
   flee.

   ^32As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand
   against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

   ^33Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with
   terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the
   haughty shall be humbled.

   ^34And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and
   Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch
   shall grow out of his roots:

   ^2And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom
   and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
   knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

   ^3And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord:
   and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove
   after the hearing of his ears:

   ^4But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with
   equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the
   rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the
   wicked.

   ^5And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness
   the girdle of his reins.

   ^6The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
   down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
   together; and a little child shall lead them.

   ^7And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down
   together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

   ^8And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
   weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

   ^9They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the
   earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
   the sea.

   ^10And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand
   for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his
   rest shall be glorious.

   ^11And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his
   hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which
   shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from
   Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the
   islands of the sea.

   ^12And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble
   the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from
   the four corners of the earth.

   ^13The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah
   shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex
   Ephraim.

   ^14But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the
   west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their
   hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

   ^15And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea;
   and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and
   shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.

   ^16And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which
   shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that
   he came up out of the land of Egypt.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou
   wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst
   me.

   ^2Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the
   Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my
   salvation.

   ^3Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.

   ^4And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name,
   declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is
   exalted.

   ^5Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known
   in all the earth.

   ^6Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One
   of Israel in the midst of thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

   ^2Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto
   them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.

   ^3I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty
   ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.

   ^4The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people;
   a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the
   Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.

   ^5They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord,
   and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.

   ^6Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a
   destruction from the Almighty.

   ^7Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall melt:

   ^8And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them;
   they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed
   one at another; their faces shall be as flames.

   ^9Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce
   anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners
   thereof out of it.

   ^10For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not
   give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the
   moon shall not cause her light to shine.

   ^11And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their
   iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and
   will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.

   ^12I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the
   golden wedge of Ophir.

   ^13Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out
   of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his
   fierce anger.

   ^14And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh
   up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one
   into his own land.

   ^15Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that
   is joined unto them shall fall by the sword.

   ^16Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes;
   their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

   ^17Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
   regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

   ^18Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall
   have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare
   children.

   ^19And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees'
   excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

   ^20It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
   generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there;
   neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

   ^21But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
   shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and
   satyrs shall dance there.

   ^22And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
   houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to
   come, and her days shall not be prolonged.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and
   set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with
   them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

   ^2And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and
   the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for
   servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose
   captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

   ^3And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee
   rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage
   wherein thou wast made to serve,

   ^4That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and
   say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!

   ^5The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the
   rulers.

   ^6He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that
   ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.

   ^7The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into
   singing.

   ^8Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon,
   saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.

   ^9Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it
   stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it
   hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.

   ^10All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as
   we? art thou become like unto us?

   ^11Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols:
   the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

   ^12How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how
   art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!

   ^13For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will
   exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount
   of the congregation, in the sides of the north:

   ^14I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the
   most High.

   ^15Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

   ^16They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee,
   saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake
   kingdoms;

   ^17That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
   thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?

   ^18All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every
   one in his own house.

   ^19But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as
   the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that
   go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet.

   ^20Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast
   destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall
   never be renowned.

   ^21Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their
   fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face
   of the world with cities.

   ^22For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut
   off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the
   Lord.

   ^23I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of
   water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^24The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so
   shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:

   ^25That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains
   tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his
   burden depart from off their shoulders.

   ^26This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this
   is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.

   ^27For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and
   his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

   ^28In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.

   ^29Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote
   thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a
   cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.

   ^30And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie
   down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay
   thy remnant.

   ^31Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved: for
   there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his
   appointed times.

   ^32What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That the
   Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and
   brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and
   brought to silence;

   ^2He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab
   shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be
   baldness, and every beard cut off.

   ^3In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the
   tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl,
   weeping abundantly.

   ^4And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard even
   unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his
   life shall be grievous unto him.

   ^5My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar,
   an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with
   weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall
   raise up a cry of destruction.

   ^6For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is withered
   away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.

   ^7Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have
   laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.

   ^8For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling
   thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim.

   ^9For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring more
   upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant
   of the land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderness,
   unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.

   ^2For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so
   the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.

   ^3Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the
   midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth.

   ^4Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them
   from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the
   spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.

   ^5And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit upon
   it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment,
   and hasting righteousness.

   ^6We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his
   haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be
   so.

   ^7Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the
   foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.

   ^8For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the lords
   of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are
   come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness: her
   branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea.

   ^9Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah:
   I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for the
   shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen.

   ^10And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and
   in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be
   shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I have
   made their vintage shouting to cease.

   ^11Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine
   inward parts for Kir-haresh.

   ^12And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the
   high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall
   not prevail.

   ^13This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning Moab since
   that time.

   ^14But now the Lord hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the
   years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with
   all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and
   feeble.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a
   city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

   ^2The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which
   shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

   ^3The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from
   Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the
   children of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^4And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall
   be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.

   ^5And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
   reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
   ears in the valley of Rephaim.

   ^6Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive
   tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or
   five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lord God of
   Israel.

   ^7At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have
   respect to the Holy One of Israel.

   ^8And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither
   shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the groves, or
   the images.

   ^9In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an
   uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of Israel:
   and there shall be desolation.

   ^10Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not
   been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant
   pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips:

   ^11In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning
   shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap
   in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

   ^12Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
   noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing
   like the rushing of mighty waters!

   ^13The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God
   shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as
   the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing
   before the whirlwind.

   ^14And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is not.
   This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob
   us.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of
   Ethiopia:

   ^2That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes
   upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered
   and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a
   nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled!

   ^3All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye,
   when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a
   trumpet, hear ye.

   ^4For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will
   consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a
   cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

   ^5For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is
   ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with
   pruninghooks, and take away and cut down the branches.

   ^6They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to
   the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all
   the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

   ^7In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts of a
   people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their
   beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose
   land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of
   hosts, the mount Zion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and
   shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his
   presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.

   ^2And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall
   fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
   neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.

   ^3And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will
   destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to
   the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the
   wizards.

   ^4And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and
   a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts.

   ^5And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted
   and dried up.

   ^6And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of defence
   shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither.

   ^7The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every
   thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more.

   ^8The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the
   brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall
   languish.

   ^9Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks,
   shall be confounded.

   ^10And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make
   sluices and ponds for fish.

   ^11Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise
   counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am
   the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?

   ^12Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now,
   and let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

   ^13The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are
   deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of
   the tribes thereof.

   ^14The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and
   they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man
   staggereth in his vomit.

   ^15Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail,
   branch or rush, may do.

   ^16In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid
   and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which
   he shaketh over it.

   ^17And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that
   maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the
   counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it.

   ^18In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the
   language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts; one shall be
   called, The city of destruction.

   ^19In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the
   land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord.

   ^20And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts
   in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the
   oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he
   shall deliver them.

   ^21And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know
   the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they
   shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it.

   ^22And the Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and they
   shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be intreated of them, and
   shall heal them.

   ^23In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and
   the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and
   the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.

   ^24In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria,
   even a blessing in the midst of the land:

   ^25Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my
   people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of
   Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it;

   ^2At the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go
   and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from
   thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.

   ^3And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and
   barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon
   Ethiopia;

   ^4So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and
   the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with
   their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.

   ^5And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation,
   and of Egypt their glory.

   ^6And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold, such
   is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the
   king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass
   through; so it cometh from the desert, from a terrible land.

   ^2A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth
   treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O
   Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.

   ^3Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold upon
   me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the
   hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of it.

   ^4My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure
   hath he turned into fear unto me.

   ^5Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye
   princes, and anoint the shield.

   ^6For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him
   declare what he seeth.

   ^7And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses,
   and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much heed:

   ^8And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continually upon the
   watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights:

   ^9And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen.
   And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the
   graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.

   ^10O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have heard of
   the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you.

   ^11The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of
   the night? Watchman, what of the night?

   ^12The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye
   will enquire, enquire ye: return, come.

   ^13The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye
   travelling companies of Dedanim.

   ^14The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was
   thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.

   ^15For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the
   bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

   ^16For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according to the
   years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail:

   ^17And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the
   children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the Lord God of Israel hath
   spoken it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art
   wholly gone up to the housetops?

   ^2Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy
   slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.

   ^3All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers: all
   that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far.

   ^4Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour not
   to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.

   ^5For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity
   by the Lord GOD of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the
   walls, and of crying to the mountains.

   ^6And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir
   uncovered the shield.

   ^7And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be full of
   chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at the gate.

   ^8And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in that
   day to the armour of the house of the forest.

   ^9Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are
   many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.

   ^10And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye
   broken down to fortify the wall.

   ^11Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old
   pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had
   respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

   ^12And in that day did the Lord GOD of hosts call to weeping, and to
   mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:

   ^13And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating
   flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall
   die.

   ^14And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, Surely this
   iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord GOD
   of hosts.

   ^15Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer,
   even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say,

   ^16What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed
   thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on
   high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?

   ^17Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and
   will surely cover thee.

   ^18He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large
   country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory
   shall be the shame of thy lord's house.

   ^19And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he
   pull thee down.

   ^20And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant
   Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:

   ^21And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy
   girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand: and he shall be
   a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.

   ^22And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so
   he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall
   open.

   ^23And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for
   a glorious throne to his father's house.

   ^24And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house,
   the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the
   vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.

   ^25In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is
   fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and
   the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the Lord hath spoken
   it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste,
   so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of Chittim it
   is revealed to them.

   ^2Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of
   Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.

   ^3And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is
   her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.

   ^4Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the strength
   of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do
   I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.

   ^5As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at
   the report of Tyre.

   ^6Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.

   ^7Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own
   feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.

   ^8Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose
   merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the
   earth?

   ^9The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory,
   and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.

   ^10Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: there is
   no more strength.

   ^11He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the
   Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to destroy the
   strong holds thereof.

   ^12And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin,
   daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou
   have no rest.

   ^13Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, til the
   Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up
   the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought
   it to ruin.

   ^14Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste.

   ^15And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten
   seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the end of
   seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot.

   ^16Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been
   forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be
   remembered.

   ^17And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the
   Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit
   fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the
   earth.

   ^18And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord: it
   shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for
   them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable
   clothing.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and
   turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.

   ^2And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the
   servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as
   with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the
   borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to
   him.

   ^3The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord
   hath spoken this word.

   ^4The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth
   away, the haughty people of the earth do languish.

   ^5The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they
   have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the
   everlasting covenant.

   ^6Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell
   therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are
   burned, and few men left.

   ^7The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do
   sigh.

   ^8The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth,
   the joy of the harp ceaseth.

   ^9They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter
   to them that drink it.

   ^10The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that
   no man may come in.

   ^11There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the
   mirth of the land is gone.

   ^12In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with
   destruction.

   ^13When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,
   there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning
   grapes when the vintage is done.

   ^14They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of
   the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea.

   ^15Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires, even the name of the
   Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea.

   ^16From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even glory
   to the righteous. But I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me!
   the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous
   dealers have dealt very treacherously.

   ^17Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the
   earth.

   ^18And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the
   fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of
   the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are
   open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.

   ^19The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the
   earth is moved exceedingly.

   ^20The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be
   removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
   upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

   ^21And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish
   the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth
   upon the earth.

   ^22And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in
   the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall
   they be visited.

   ^23Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
   Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before
   his ancients gloriously.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for
   thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness
   and truth.

   ^2For thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: a
   palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.

   ^3Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the
   terrible nations shall fear thee.

   ^4For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in
   his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the
   blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall.

   ^5Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry
   place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the
   terrible ones shall be brought low.

   ^6And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a
   feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full
   of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

   ^7And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast
   over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.

   ^8He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord GOD will wipe away
   tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take
   away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.

   ^9And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited
   for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him,
   we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

   ^10For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall
   be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the
   dunghill.

   ^11And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that
   swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down
   their pride together with the spoils of their hands.

   ^12And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down,
   lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a
   strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

   ^2Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth
   may enter in.

   ^3Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee:
   because he trusteth in thee.

   ^4Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting
   strength:

   ^5For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he
   layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it
   even to the dust.

   ^6The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the
   steps of the needy.

   ^7The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost weigh
   the path of the just.

   ^8Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee;
   the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

   ^9With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit
   within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the
   earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

   ^10Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
   righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and
   will not behold the majesty of the Lord.

   ^11Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall
   see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of
   thine enemies shall devour them.

   ^12Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all
   our works in us.

   ^13O Lord our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us:
   but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.

   ^14They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall
   not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all
   their memory to perish.

   ^15Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased the
   nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto all the ends
   of the earth.

   ^16Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer
   when thy chastening was upon them.

   ^17Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her
   delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in
   thy sight, O Lord.

   ^18We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were
   brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth;
   neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.

   ^19Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
   arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew
   of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

   ^20Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors
   about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the
   indignation be overpast.

   ^21For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the
   inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
   disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall
   punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked
   serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.

   ^2In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.

   ^3I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt
   it, I will keep it night and day.

   ^4Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in
   battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.

   ^5Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me;
   and he shall make peace with me.

   ^6He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall
   blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

   ^7Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain
   according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?

   ^8In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he
   stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.

   ^9By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is
   all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of
   the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and
   images shall not stand up.

   ^10Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation
   forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and
   there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.

   ^11When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the
   women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no
   understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them,
   and he that formed them will shew them no favour.

   ^12And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off
   from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be
   gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.

   ^13And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall
   be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of
   Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the
   Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious
   beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of
   them that are overcome with wine!

   ^2Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of
   hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing,
   shall cast down to the earth with the hand.

   ^3The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under
   feet:

   ^4And the glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley,
   shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer;
   which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand
   he eateth it up.

   ^5In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for
   a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people,

   ^6And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for
   strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.

   ^7But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are
   out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong
   drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through
   strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.

   ^8For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no
   place clean.

   ^9Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand
   doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
   breasts.

   ^10For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon
   line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little:

   ^11For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this
   people.

   ^12To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary
   to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.

   ^13But the word of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, precept
   upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there
   a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and
   snared, and taken.

   ^14Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this
   people which is in Jerusalem.

   ^15Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with
   hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass
   through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge,
   and under falsehood have we hid ourselves:

   ^16Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I lay in Zion for a
   foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
   foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.

   ^17Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the
   plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
   waters shall overflow the hiding place.

   ^18And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
   agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall
   pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.

   ^19From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by
   morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a
   vexation only to understand the report.

   ^20For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it:
   and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.

   ^21For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as
   in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and
   bring to pass his act, his strange act.

   ^22Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for
   I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a consumption, even determined
   upon the whole earth.

   ^23Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

   ^24Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the
   clods of his ground?

   ^25When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad
   the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat
   and the appointed barley and rie in their place?

   ^26For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him.

   ^27For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument,
   neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches
   are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

   ^28Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor
   break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen.

   ^29This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in
   counsel, and excellent in working.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to
   year; let them kill sacrifices.

   ^2Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow:
   and it shall be unto me as Ariel.

   ^3And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against
   thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.

   ^4And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground,
   and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as
   of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech
   shall whisper out of the dust.

   ^5Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and
   the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away:
   yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.

   ^6Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with
   earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of
   devouring fire.

   ^7And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even
   all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her,
   shall be as a dream of a night vision.

   ^8It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he
   eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man
   dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is
   faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the
   nations be, that fight against mount Zion.

   ^9Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken,
   but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

   ^10For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and
   hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he
   covered.

   ^11And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that
   is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this,
   I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:

   ^12And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read
   this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

   ^13Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
   their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their
   heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of
   men:

   ^14Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this
   people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their
   wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall
   be hid.

   ^15Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord,
   and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who
   knoweth us?

   ^16Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the
   potter's clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me
   not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no
   understanding?

   ^17Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into
   a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?

   ^18And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the
   eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

   ^19The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor
   among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

   ^20For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
   consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off:

   ^21That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that
   reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

   ^22Therefore thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the
   house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face
   now wax pale.

   ^23But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst
   of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of
   Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.

   ^24They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they
   that murmured shall learn doctrine.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel, but
   not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that
   they may add sin to sin:

   ^2That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to
   strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the
   shadow of Egypt!

   ^3Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust
   in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.

   ^4For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.

   ^5They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be
   an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.

   ^6The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and
   anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery
   flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of
   young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a
   people that shall not profit them.

   ^7For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore
   have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still.

   ^8Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that
   it may be for the time to come for ever and ever:

   ^9That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will
   not hear the law of the Lord:

   ^10Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not
   unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits:

   ^11Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy
   One of Israel to cease from before us.

   ^12Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this
   word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:

   ^13Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall,
   swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an
   instant.

   ^14And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is
   broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found
   in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take
   water withal out of the pit.

   ^15For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel; In returning
   and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be
   your strength: and ye would not.

   ^16But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye
   flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that
   pursue you be swift.

   ^17One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five
   shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain,
   and as an ensign on an hill.

   ^18And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you,
   and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for
   the Lord is a God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait for him.

   ^19For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no
   more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when
   he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

   ^20And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water
   of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any
   more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:

   ^21And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the
   way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to
   the left.

   ^22Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver,
   and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them
   away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence.

   ^23Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the
   ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be
   fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.

   ^24The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat
   clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the
   fan.

   ^25And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high
   hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter,
   when the towers fall.

   ^26Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and
   the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in
   the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth
   the stroke of their wound.

   ^27Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from far, burning with his
   anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of
   indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:

   ^28And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst
   of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there
   shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing them to err.

   ^29Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept;
   and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the
   mountain of the Lord, to the mighty One of Israel.

   ^30And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall
   shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger,
   and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest,
   and hailstones.

   ^31For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down,
   which smote with a rod.

   ^32And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the
   Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and in
   battles of shaking will he fight with it.

   ^33For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he
   hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood;
   the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and
   trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they
   are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither
   seek the Lord!

   ^2Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his
   words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against
   the help of them that work iniquity.

   ^3Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and
   not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that
   helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all
   shall fail together.

   ^4For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young
   lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth
   against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself
   for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
   for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.

   ^5As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem;
   defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve
   it.

   ^6Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
   revolted.

   ^7For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and
   his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin.

   ^8Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and
   the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee from
   the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited.

   ^9And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes
   shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion,
   and his furnace in Jerusalem.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in
   judgment.

   ^2And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert
   from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a
   great rock in a weary land.

   ^3And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them
   that hear shall hearken.

   ^4The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue
   of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

   ^5The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said
   to be bountiful.

   ^6For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work
   iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord,
   to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of
   the thirsty to fail.

   ^7The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked
   devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy
   speaketh right.

   ^8But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall
   he stand.

   ^9Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless
   daughters; give ear unto my speech.

   ^10Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the
   vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.

   ^11Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones:
   strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins.

   ^12They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for the
   fruitful vine.

   ^13Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea,
   upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city:

   ^14Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city
   shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy
   of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

   ^15Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness
   be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest.

   ^16Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness
   remain in the fruitful field.

   ^17And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
   righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

   ^18And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
   dwellings, and in quiet resting places;

   ^19When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be
   low in a low place.

   ^20Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither
   the feet of the ox and the ass.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
   treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou
   shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make
   an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

   ^2O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their
   arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

   ^3At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of
   thyself the nations were scattered.

   ^4And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the
   caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon
   them.

   ^5The Lord is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion
   with judgment and righteousness.

   ^6And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
   strength of salvation: the fear of the Lord is his treasure.

   ^7Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of
   peace shall weep bitterly.

   ^8The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the
   covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.

   ^9The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down:
   Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their
   fruits.

   ^10Now will I rise, saith the Lord; now will I be exalted; now will I
   lift up myself.

   ^11Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath,
   as fire, shall devour you.

   ^12And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up
   shall they be burned in the fire.

   ^13Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near,
   acknowledge my might.

   ^14The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the
   hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among
   us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

   ^15He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that
   despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding
   of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth
   his eyes from seeing evil;

   ^16He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the munitions
   of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.

   ^17Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the
   land that is very far off.

   ^18Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the
   receiver? where is he that counted the towers?

   ^19Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than
   thou canst perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not
   understand.

   ^20Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see
   Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken
   down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither
   shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

   ^21But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers
   and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall
   gallant ship pass thereby.

   ^22For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our
   king; he will save us.

   ^23Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast,
   they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil
   divided; the lame take the prey.

   ^24And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell
   therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth
   hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come
   forth of it.

   ^2For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury
   upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath
   delivered them to the slaughter.

   ^3Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out
   of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.

   ^4And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall
   be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as
   the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig
   tree.

   ^5For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down
   upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.

   ^6The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with
   fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the
   kidneys of rams: for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
   slaughter in the land of Idumea.

   ^7And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the
   bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made
   fat with fatness.

   ^8For it is the day of the Lord'S vengeance, and the year of
   recompences for the controversy of Zion.

   ^9And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust
   thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning
   pitch.

   ^10It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go
   up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none
   shall pass through it for ever and ever.

   ^11But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and
   the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line
   of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

   ^12They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be
   there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

   ^13And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the
   fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a
   court for owls.

   ^14The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts
   of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl
   also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.

   ^15There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
   gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered,
   every one with her mate.

   ^16Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read: no one of these shall
   fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and his
   spirit it hath gathered them.

   ^17And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto
   them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
   generation shall they dwell therein.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the
   desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

   ^2It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing:
   the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel
   and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of
   our God.

   ^3Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

   ^4Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold,
   your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will
   come and save you.

   ^5Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf
   shall be unstopped.

   ^6Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb
   sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
   desert.

   ^7And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
   springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall
   be grass with reeds and rushes.

   ^8And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The
   way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be
   for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

   ^9No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon,
   it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there:

   ^10And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with
   songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
   gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that
   Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of
   Judah, and took them.

   ^2And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto
   king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the
   upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.

   ^3Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the
   house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.

   ^4And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the
   great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou
   trustest?

   ^5I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and
   strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest
   against me?

   ^6Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon
   if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh
   king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

   ^7But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God: is it not he,
   whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said
   to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?

   ^8Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of
   Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on
   thy part to set riders upon them.

   ^9How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of
   my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for
   horsemen?

   ^10And am I now come up without the Lord against this land to destroy
   it? the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.

   ^11Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray
   thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it:
   and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people
   that are on the wall.

   ^12But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee
   to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the
   wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with
   you?

   ^13Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews'
   language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of
   Assyria.

   ^14Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not
   be able to deliver you.

   ^15Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord
   will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand
   of the king of Assyria.

   ^16Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an
   agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every
   one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one
   the waters of his own cistern;

   ^17Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land
   of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.

   ^18Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The Lord will deliver us.
   Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand
   of the king of Assyria?

   ^19Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of
   Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?

   ^20Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered
   their land out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out
   of my hand?

   ^21But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the
   king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

   ^22Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household,
   and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to
   Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his
   clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of
   the Lord.

   ^2And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the
   scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto
   Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

   ^3And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
   trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
   the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

   ^4It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the
   king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God, and
   will reprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard: wherefore
   lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

   ^5So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

   ^6And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus
   saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,
   wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

   ^7Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and
   return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in
   his own land.

   ^8So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against
   Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

   ^9And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come
   forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers
   to Hezekiah, saying,

   ^10Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy
   God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not
   be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.

   ^11Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all
   lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?

   ^12Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have
   destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden
   which were in Telassar?

   ^13Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of
   the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?

   ^14And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers,
   and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and
   spread it before the Lord.

   ^15And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying,

   ^16O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims,
   thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth:
   thou hast made heaven and earth.

   ^17Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O Lord, and
   see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach
   the living God.

   ^18Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
   nations, and their countries,

   ^19And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but
   the work of men's hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed
   them.

   ^20Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all the
   kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou only.

   ^21Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith
   the Lord God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against
   Sennacherib king of Assyria:

   ^22This is the word which the Lord hath spoken concerning him; The
   virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, and laughed thee to
   scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.

   ^23Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou
   exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the
   Holy One of Israel.

   ^24By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By the
   multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains,
   to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall cedars thereof,
   and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the height of
   his border, and the forest of his Carmel.

   ^25I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I
   dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.

   ^26Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient
   times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
   shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.

   ^27Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed
   and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as the green
   herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be
   grown up.

   ^28But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy
   rage against me.

   ^29Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine
   ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy
   lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

   ^30And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as
   groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the
   same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and
   eat the fruit thereof.

   ^31And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again
   take root downward, and bear fruit upward:

   ^32For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape
   out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.

   ^33Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He
   shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there nor come before
   it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

   ^34By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not
   come into this city, saith the Lord.

   ^35For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my
   servant David's sake.

   ^36Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the
   Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
   arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

   ^37So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and
   dwelt at Nineveh.

   ^38And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch
   his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the
   sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon his
   son reigned in his stead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the
   son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set
   thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

   ^2Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
   Lord,

   ^3And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
   before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
   is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

   ^4Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying,

   ^5Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy
   father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will
   add unto thy days fifteen years.

   ^6And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of
   Assyria: and I will defend this city.

   ^7And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will
   do this thing that he hath spoken;

   ^8Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone
   down in the sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned
   ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.

   ^9The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
   recovered of his sickness:

   ^10I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the
   grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.

   ^11I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord, in the land of the
   living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.

   ^12Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I
   have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining
   sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

   ^13I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my
   bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

   ^14Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove:
   mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed; undertake
   for me.

   ^15What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done
   it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

   ^16O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the
   life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.

   ^17Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love to
   my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all
   my sins behind thy back.

   ^18For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they
   that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

   ^19The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the
   father to the children shall make known thy truth.

   ^20The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to
   the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the
   Lord.

   ^21For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a
   plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

   ^22Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the
   house of the Lord?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   At that time Merodach-baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,
   sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had
   been sick, and was recovered.

   ^2And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his
   precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
   precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was
   found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his
   dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

   ^3Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him,
   What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah
   said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.

   ^4Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
   answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing
   among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

   ^5Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts:

   ^6Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
   which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be
   carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.

   ^7And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget,
   shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the
   king of Babylon.

   ^8Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou
   hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my
   days.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

   ^2Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare
   is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received
   of the Lord'S hand double for all her sins.

   ^3The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
   the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.

   ^4Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
   made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places
   plain:

   ^5And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see
   it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.

   ^6The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
   grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:

   ^7The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the
   Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

   ^8The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall
   stand for ever.

   ^9O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
   mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
   with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah,
   Behold your God!

   ^10Behold, the Lord GOD will come with strong hand, and his arm shall
   rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

   ^11He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs
   with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those
   that are with young.

   ^12Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
   out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a
   measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
   balance?

   ^13Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor
   hath taught him?

   ^14With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in
   the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the
   way of understanding?

   ^15Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as
   the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very
   little thing.

   ^16And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
   sufficient for a burnt offering.

   ^17All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him
   less than nothing, and vanity.

   ^18To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
   unto him?

   ^19The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it
   over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

   ^20He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree
   that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a
   graven image, that shall not be moved.

   ^21Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from
   the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
   earth?

   ^22It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the
   inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the
   heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:

   ^23That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the
   earth as vanity.

   ^24Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea,
   their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow
   upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them
   away as stubble.

   ^25To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy
   One.

   ^26Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things,
   that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by
   the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one
   faileth.

   ^27Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from
   the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God?

   ^28Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
   the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither
   is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

   ^29He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
   increaseth strength.

   ^30Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall
   utterly fall:

   ^31But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they
   shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary;
   and they shall walk, and not faint.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their
   strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near
   together to judgment.

   ^2Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his
   foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he
   gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.

   ^3He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not
   gone with his feet.

   ^4Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the
   beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he.

   ^5The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew
   near, and came.

   ^6They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
   brother, Be of good courage.

   ^7So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with
   the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the
   sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

   ^8But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed
   of Abraham my friend.

   ^9Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee
   from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I
   have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

   ^10Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
   God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
   thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

   ^11Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed
   and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with
   thee shall perish.

   ^12Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
   contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
   and as a thing of nought.

   ^13For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee,
   Fear not; I will help thee.

   ^14Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee,
   saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

   ^15Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
   teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
   make the hills as chaff.

   ^16Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
   whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and
   shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

   ^17When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
   tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of
   Israel will not forsake them.

   ^18I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the
   valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land
   springs of water.

   ^19I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the
   myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and
   the pine, and the box tree together:

   ^20That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together,
   that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel
   hath created it.

   ^21Produce your cause, saith the Lord; bring forth your strong reasons,
   saith the King of Jacob.

   ^22Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them
   shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and
   know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

   ^23Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye
   are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold
   it together.

   ^24Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination
   is he that chooseth you.

   ^25I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
   rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
   princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

   ^26Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and
   beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that
   sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that
   heareth your words.

   ^27The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to
   Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

   ^28For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was
   no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

   ^29Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten
   images are wind and confusion.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
   delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
   judgment to the Gentiles.

   ^2He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
   street.

   ^3A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
   quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

   ^4He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in
   the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

   ^5Thus saith God the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched
   them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of
   it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them
   that walk therein:

   ^6I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine
   hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people,
   for a light of the Gentiles;

   ^7To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
   and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

   ^8I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to
   another, neither my praise to graven images.

   ^9Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
   declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

   ^10Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the
   earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles,
   and the inhabitants thereof.

   ^11Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the
   villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing,
   let them shout from the top of the mountains.

   ^12Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the
   islands.

   ^13The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy
   like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against
   his enemies.

   ^14I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained
   myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and
   devour at once.

   ^15I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs;
   and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.

   ^16And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead
   them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light
   before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto
   them, and not forsake them.

   ^17They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust
   in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.

   ^18Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

   ^19Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent?
   who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord'S servant?

   ^20Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he
   heareth not.

   ^21The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
   magnify the law, and make it honourable.

   ^22But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared
   in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and
   none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

   ^23Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for
   the time to come?

   ^24Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the
   Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his
   ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.

   ^25Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
   strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
   knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 43

   But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that
   formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have
   called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

   ^2When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
   through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
   through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
   kindle upon thee.

   ^3For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I
   gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

   ^4Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and
   I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for
   thy life.

   ^5Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east,
   and gather thee from the west;

   ^6I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back:
   bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;

   ^7Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for
   my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him.

   ^8Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have
   ears.

   ^9Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be
   assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
   let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
   let them hear, and say, It is truth.

   ^10Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have
   chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he:
   before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

   ^11I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour.

   ^12I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was
   no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the
   Lord, that I am God.

   ^13Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver
   out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?

   ^14Thus saith the Lord, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your
   sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles,
   and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.

   ^15I am the Lord, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.

   ^16Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in
   the mighty waters;

   ^17Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power;
   they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct,
   they are quenched as tow.

   ^18Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of
   old.

   ^19Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye
   not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in
   the desert.

   ^20The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls:
   because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to
   give drink to my people, my chosen.

   ^21This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my
   praise.

   ^22But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary
   of me, O Israel.

   ^23Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings;
   neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused
   thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.

   ^24Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
   filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
   serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.

   ^25I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
   sake, and will not remember thy sins.

   ^26Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that
   thou mayest be justified.

   ^27Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
   against me.

   ^28Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have
   given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 44

   Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:

   ^2Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb,
   which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun,
   whom I have chosen.

   ^3For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
   dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
   thine offspring:

   ^4And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water
   courses.

   ^5One shall say, I am the Lord'S; and another shall call himself by the
   name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord,
   and surname himself by the name of Israel.

   ^6Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of
   hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no
   God.

   ^7And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order
   for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are
   coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

   ^8Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time,
   and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside
   me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.

   ^9They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their
   delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses;
   they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

   ^10Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable
   for nothing?

   ^11Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are
   of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they
   shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.

   ^12The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth
   it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he
   is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is
   faint.

   ^13The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a
   line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the
   compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the
   beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

   ^14He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which
   he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth
   an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

   ^15Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and
   warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a
   god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down
   thereto.

   ^16He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth
   flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself,
   and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:

   ^17And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he
   falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and
   saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.

   ^18They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes,
   that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.

   ^19And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor
   understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I
   have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and
   eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I
   fall down to the stock of a tree?

   ^20He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he
   cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

   ^21Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have
   formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten
   of me.

   ^22I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a
   cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.

   ^23Sing, O ye heavens; for the Lord hath done it: shout, ye lower parts
   of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and
   every tree therein: for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified
   himself in Israel.

   ^24Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the
   womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the
   heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;

   ^25That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad;
   that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;

   ^26That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel
   of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited;
   and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the
   decayed places thereof:

   ^27That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:

   ^28That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
   pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the
   temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 45

   Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have
   holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of
   kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not
   be shut;

   ^2I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will
   break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:

   ^3And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of
   secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee
   by thy name, am the God of Israel.

   ^4For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even
   called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not
   known me.

   ^5I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I
   girded thee, though thou hast not known me:

   ^6That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west,
   that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else.

   ^7I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil:
   I the Lord do all these things.

   ^8Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down
   righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation,
   and let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created it.

   ^9Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive
   with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that
   fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?

   ^10Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to
   the woman, What hast thou brought forth?

   ^11Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me
   of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my
   hands command ye me.

   ^12I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands,
   have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.

   ^13I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
   ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
   price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^14Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of
   Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee,
   and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they
   shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make
   supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is
   none else, there is no God.

   ^15Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
   Saviour.

   ^16They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall
   go to confusion together that are makers of idols.

   ^17But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation:
   ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

   ^18For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that
   formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not
   in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the Lord; and there is none
   else.

   ^19I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said
   not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the Lord speak
   righteousness, I declare things that are right.

   ^20Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are
   escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of
   their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

   ^21Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together:
   who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that
   time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just
   God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.

   ^22Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am
   God, and there is none else.

   ^23I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
   righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow,
   every tongue shall swear.

   ^24Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and
   strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against
   him shall be ashamed.

   ^25In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
   glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 46

   Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and
   upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to
   the weary beast.

   ^2They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the
   burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.

   ^3Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house
   of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from
   the womb:

   ^4And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry
   you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver
   you.

   ^5To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we
   may be like?

   ^6They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and
   hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they
   worship.

   ^7They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his
   place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one
   shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his
   trouble.

   ^8Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye
   transgressors.

   ^9Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none
   else; I am God, and there is none like me,

   ^10Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the
   things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I
   will do all my pleasure:

   ^11Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my
   counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it
   to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.

   ^12Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness:

   ^13I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my
   salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for
   Israel my glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 47

   Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on
   the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou
   shalt no more be called tender and delicate.

   ^2Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the
   leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.

   ^3Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I
   will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.

   ^4As for our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of
   Israel.

   ^5Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
   Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.

   ^6I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and
   given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the
   ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.

   ^7And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not
   lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of
   it.

   ^8Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that
   dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else
   beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of
   children:

   ^9But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the
   loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their
   perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great
   abundance of thine enchantments.

   ^10For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth
   me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast
   said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.

   ^11Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence
   it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to
   put if off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou
   shalt not know.

   ^12Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
   sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou
   shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.

   ^13Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the
   astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and
   save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

   ^14Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they
   shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall
   not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

   ^15Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy
   merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter;
   none shall save thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 48

   Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel,
   and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name
   of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth,
   nor in righteousness.

   ^2For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon
   the God of Israel; The Lord of hosts is his name.

   ^3I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went
   forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they
   came to pass.

   ^4Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
   sinew, and thy brow brass;

   ^5I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to
   pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done
   them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.

   ^6Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have
   shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou
   didst not know them.

   ^7They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day
   when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew
   them.

   ^8Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time
   that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very
   treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

   ^9For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I
   refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

   ^10Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee
   in the furnace of affliction.

   ^11For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how
   should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.

   ^12Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the
   first, I also am the last.

   ^13Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right
   hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up
   together.

   ^14All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
   declared these things? The Lord hath loved him: he will do his pleasure
   on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

   ^15I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him,
   and he shall make his way prosperous.

   ^16Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from
   the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord
   GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

   ^17Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the
   Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the
   way that thou shouldest go.

   ^18O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace
   been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:

   ^19Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels
   like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor
   destroyed from before me.

   ^20Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of
   singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth;
   say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob.

   ^21And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he
   caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock
   also, and the waters gushed out.

   ^22There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 49

   Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord
   hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made
   mention of my name.

   ^2And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his
   hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath
   he hid me;

   ^3And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be
   glorified.

   ^4Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for
   nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my
   work with my God.

   ^5And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his
   servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered,
   yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my
   strength.

   ^6And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to
   raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I
   will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my
   salvation unto the end of the earth.

   ^7Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him
   whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of
   rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because
   of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall
   choose thee.

   ^8Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in
   a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and
   give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
   cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

   ^9That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in
   darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their
   pastures shall be in all high places.

   ^10They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun
   smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the
   springs of water shall he guide them.

   ^11And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be
   exalted.

   ^12Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and
   from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

   ^13Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into
   singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will
   have mercy upon his afflicted.

   ^14But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten
   me.

   ^15Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
   compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not
   forget thee.

   ^16Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are
   continually before me.

   ^17Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made
   thee waste shall go forth of thee.

   ^18Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather
   themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou
   shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
   them on thee, as a bride doeth.

   ^19For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
   destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants,
   and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

   ^20The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other,
   shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give
   place to me that I may dwell.

   ^21Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these,
   seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
   removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left
   alone; these, where had they been?

   ^22Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the
   Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring
   thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their
   shoulders.

   ^23And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing
   mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth,
   and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the
   Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

   ^24Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive
   delivered?

   ^25But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be
   taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will
   contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy
   children.

   ^26And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and
   they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all
   flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the
   mighty One of Jacob.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 50

   Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement,
   whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have
   sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for
   your transgressions is your mother put away.

   ^2Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there
   none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or
   have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I
   make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no
   water, and dieth for thirst.

   ^3I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their
   covering.

   ^4The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should
   know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth
   morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.

   ^5The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither
   turned away back.

   ^6I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off
   the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

   ^7For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded:
   therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not
   be ashamed.

   ^8He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand
   together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

   ^9Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn me?
   lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.

   ^10Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of
   his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust
   in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

   ^11Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
   with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
   have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in
   sorrow.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 51

   Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the
   Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit
   whence ye are digged.

   ^2Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I
   called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.

   ^3For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste
   places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like
   the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein,
   thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

   ^4Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a
   law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a
   light of the people.

   ^5My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms
   shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm
   shall they trust.

   ^6Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath:
   for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax
   old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like
   manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall
   not be abolished.

   ^7Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
   heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid
   of their revilings.

   ^8For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat
   them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my
   salvation from generation to generation.

   ^9Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the
   ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut
   Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

   ^10Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great
   deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to
   pass over?

   ^11Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with
   singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they
   shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

   ^12I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou
   shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man
   which shall be made as grass;

   ^13And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the
   heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared
   continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he
   were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor?

   ^14The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he
   should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.

   ^15But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared:
   The Lord of hosts is his name.

   ^16And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the
   shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the
   foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.

   ^17Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of
   the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of
   trembling, and wrung them out.

   ^18There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought
   forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons
   that she hath brought up.

   ^19These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee?
   desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom
   shall I comfort thee?

   ^20Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a
   wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke
   of thy God.

   ^21Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with
   wine:

   ^22Thus saith thy Lord the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of
   his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of
   trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more
   drink it again:

   ^23But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which
   have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast
   laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 52

   Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful
   garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no
   more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

   ^2Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose
   thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

   ^3For thus saith the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye
   shall be redeemed without money.

   ^4For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into Egypt
   to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.

   ^5Now therefore, what have I here, saith the Lord, that my people is
   taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl,
   saith the Lord; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.

   ^6Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in
   that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I.

   ^7How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth
   good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of
   good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God
   reigneth!

   ^8Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall
   they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring
   again Zion.

   ^9Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem:
   for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.

   ^10The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations;
   and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.

   ^11Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing;
   go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of
   the Lord.

   ^12For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the Lord
   will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.

   ^13Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
   extolled, and be very high.

   ^14As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more than
   any man, and his form more than the sons of men:

   ^15So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths
   at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that
   which they had not heard shall they consider.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 53

   Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
   revealed?

   ^2For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out
   of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see
   him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

   ^3He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted
   with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised,
   and we esteemed him not.

   ^4Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
   esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

   ^5But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
   iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
   stripes we are healed.

   ^6All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his
   own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

   ^7He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth:
   he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
   shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

   ^8He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his
   generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the
   transgression of my people was he stricken.

   ^9And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
   death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
   mouth.

   ^10Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief:
   when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
   seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall
   prosper in his hand.

   ^11He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by
   his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall
   bear their iniquities.

   ^12Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
   divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul
   unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the
   sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 54

   Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and
   cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the
   children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith
   the Lord.

   ^2Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
   curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and
   strengthen thy stakes;

   ^3For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy
   seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be
   inhabited.

   ^4Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded;
   for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of
   thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any
   more.

   ^5For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and
   thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall
   he be called.

   ^6For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
   spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

   ^7For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will
   I gather thee.

   ^8In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
   everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy
   Redeemer.

   ^9For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that
   the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn
   that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

   ^10For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
   kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
   peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.

   ^11O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I
   will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
   sapphires.

   ^12And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles,
   and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

   ^13And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be
   the peace of thy children.

   ^14In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from
   oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not
   come near thee.

   ^15Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
   shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

   ^16Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire,
   and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created
   the waster to destroy.

   ^17No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every
   tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.
   This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
   righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 55

   Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath
   no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without
   money and without price.

   ^2Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
   labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and
   eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.

   ^3Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live;
   and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
   of David.

   ^4Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
   commander to the people.

   ^5Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations
   that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the Lord thy God, and
   for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.

   ^6Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
   near:

   ^7Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts:
   and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and
   to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

   ^8For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
   saith the Lord.

   ^9For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher
   than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

   ^10For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth
   not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud,
   that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:

   ^11So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not
   return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and
   it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

   ^12For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
   mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and
   all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

   ^13Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the
   brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the Lord for a
   name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 56

   Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation
   is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.

   ^2Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth
   hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his
   hand from doing any evil.

   ^3Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the
   Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me from his
   people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.

   ^4For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and
   choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;

   ^5Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place
   and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an
   everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

   ^6Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to
   serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every
   one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my
   covenant;

   ^7Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in
   my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be
   accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of
   prayer for all people.

   ^8The Lord GOD which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I
   gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.

   ^9All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the
   forest.

   ^10His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
   dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.

   ^11Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are
   shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every
   one for his gain, from his quarter.

   ^12Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves
   with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
   abundant.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 57

   The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful
   men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
   from the evil to come.

   ^2He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one
   walking in his uprightness.

   ^3But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
   adulterer and the whore.

   ^4Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide
   mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a
   seed of falsehood,

   ^5Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the
   children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?

   ^6Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are
   thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast
   offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?

   ^7Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither
   wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.

   ^8Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance:
   for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up;
   thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou
   lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

   ^9And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy
   perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase
   thyself even unto hell.

   ^10Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not,
   There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore
   thou wast not grieved.

   ^11And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied,
   and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held
   my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?

   ^12I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not
   profit thee.

   ^13When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall
   carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth his
   trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain;

   ^14And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the
   stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

   ^15For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
   whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
   that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
   humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

   ^16For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for
   the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.

   ^17For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I
   hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
   heart.

   ^18I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
   restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

   ^19I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far off,
   and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him.

   ^20But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose
   waters cast up mire and dirt.

   ^21There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 58

   Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my
   people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

   ^2Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that
   did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask
   of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to
   God.

   ^3Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore
   have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in
   the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

   ^4Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
   wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to
   be heard on high.

   ^5Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his
   soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth
   and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day
   to the Lord?

   ^6Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
   wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
   free, and that ye break every yoke?

   ^7Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
   poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that
   thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?

   ^8Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
   shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before
   thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

   ^9Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and
   he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the
   yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;

   ^10And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
   afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
   darkness be as the noonday:

   ^11And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
   drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered
   garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

   ^12And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places:
   thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt
   be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell
   in.

   ^13If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure
   on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
   honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
   thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

   ^14Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee
   to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
   heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 59

   Behold, the Lord'S hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither
   his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:

   ^2But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
   sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

   ^3For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
   iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered
   perverseness.

   ^4None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in
   vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
   iniquity.

   ^5They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that
   eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into
   a viper.

   ^6Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
   themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the
   act of violence is in their hands.

   ^7Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood:
   their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in
   their paths.

   ^8The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their
   goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein
   shall not know peace.

   ^9Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us:
   we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in
   darkness.

   ^10We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no
   eyes: we stumble at noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places
   as dead men.

   ^11We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
   judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

   ^12For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
   testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our
   iniquities, we know them;

   ^13In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from
   our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from
   the heart words of falsehood.

   ^14And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off:
   for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

   ^15Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a
   prey: and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no
   judgment.

   ^16And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
   intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his
   righteousness, it sustained him.

   ^17For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of
   salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for
   clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.

   ^18According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his
   adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay
   recompence.

   ^19So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory
   from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood,
   the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.

   ^20And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from
   transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.

   ^21As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit
   that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
   not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out
   of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and
   for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 60

   Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
   upon thee.

   ^2For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness
   the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
   seen upon thee.

   ^3And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness
   of thy rising.

   ^4Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves
   together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy
   daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

   ^5Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear,
   and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted
   unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

   ^6The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian
   and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and
   incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the Lord.

   ^7All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the
   rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with
   acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.

   ^8Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?

   ^9Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first,
   to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto
   the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he
   hath glorified thee.

   ^10And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings
   shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my
   favour have I had mercy on thee.

   ^11Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be
   shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
   Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

   ^12For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish;
   yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

   ^13The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine
   tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and
   I will make the place of my feet glorious.

   ^14The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
   thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the
   soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The
   Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

   ^15Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
   through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
   generations.

   ^16Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the
   breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and
   thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

   ^17For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and
   for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers
   peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

   ^18Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction
   within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy
   gates Praise.

   ^19The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness
   shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an
   everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

   ^20Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw
   itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of
   thy mourning shall be ended.

   ^21Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land
   for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may
   be glorified.

   ^22A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
   nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 61

   The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed
   me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the
   brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
   the prison to them that are bound;

   ^2To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
   of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

   ^3To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for
   ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
   spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness,
   the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.

   ^4And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former
   desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of
   many generations.

   ^5And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the
   alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

   ^6But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the
   Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in
   their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

   ^7For your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall
   rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess
   the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.

   ^8For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and
   I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting
   covenant with them.

   ^9And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring
   among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they
   are the seed which the Lord hath blessed.

   ^10I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
   God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath
   covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
   himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
   jewels.

   ^11For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth
   the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord GOD will
   cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 62

   For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I
   will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness,
   and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

   ^2And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
   glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the
   Lord shall name.

   ^3Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a
   royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

   ^4Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any
   more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy
   land Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be
   married.

   ^5For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee:
   and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God
   rejoice over thee.

   ^6I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
   hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep
   not silence,

   ^7And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
   praise in the earth.

   ^8The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his
   strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine
   enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the
   which thou hast laboured:

   ^9But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and
   they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my
   holiness.

   ^10Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people;
   cast up, cast up the highways; gather out the stones; lift up a
   standard for the people.

   ^11Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye
   to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his
   reward is with him, and his work before him.

   ^12And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the Lord:
   and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 63

   Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this
   that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his
   strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

   ^2Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him
   that treadeth in the winefat?

   ^3I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none
   with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my
   fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will
   stain all my raiment.

   ^4For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my
   redeemed is come.

   ^5And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there
   was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me;
   and my fury, it upheld me.

   ^6And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk
   in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

   ^7I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of
   the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the
   great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on
   them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his
   lovingkindnesses.

   ^8For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie:
   so he was their Saviour.

   ^9In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
   presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and
   he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

   ^10But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was
   turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

   ^11Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying,
   Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of
   his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him?

   ^12That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm,
   dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?

   ^13That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that
   they should not stumble?

   ^14As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused
   him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious
   name.

   ^15Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
   holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the
   sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they
   restrained?

   ^16Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
   Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our father, our redeemer;
   thy name is from everlasting.

   ^17O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our
   heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine
   inheritance.

   ^18The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while: our
   adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

   ^19We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not called
   by thy name.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 64

   Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down,
   that the mountains might flow down at thy presence,

   ^2As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to
   boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may
   tremble at thy presence!

   ^3When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest
   down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.

   ^4For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
   perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee,
   what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

   ^5Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that
   remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned:
   in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

   ^6But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are
   as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like
   the wind, have taken us away.

   ^7And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up
   himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and
   hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.

   ^8But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our
   potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

   ^9Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever:
   behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

   ^10Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a
   desolation.

   ^11Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is
   burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste.

   ^12Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O Lord? wilt thou hold
   thy peace, and afflict us very sore?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 65

   I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that
   sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not
   called by my name.

   ^2I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
   which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts;

   ^3A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that
   sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick;

   ^4Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat
   swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;

   ^5Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier
   than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the
   day.

   ^6Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep silence, but will
   recompense, even recompense into their bosom,

   ^7Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith
   the Lord, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed
   me upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into
   their bosom.

   ^8Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one
   saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my
   servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

   ^9And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an
   inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
   servants shall dwell there.

   ^10And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a
   place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.

   ^11But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain,
   that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the drink
   offering unto that number.

   ^12Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down
   to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I
   spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose
   that wherein I delighted not.

   ^13Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants shall eat,
   but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall
   be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:

   ^14Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry
   for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

   ^15And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the
   Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name:

   ^16That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the
   God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God
   of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they
   are hid from mine eyes.

   ^17For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former
   shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

   ^18But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for,
   behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

   ^19And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice
   of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

   ^20There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that
   hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old;
   but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

   ^21And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant
   vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

   ^22They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and
   another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and
   mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

   ^23They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they
   are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.

   ^24And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and
   while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

   ^25The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat
   straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They
   shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 66

   Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
   footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the
   place of my rest?

   ^2For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have
   been, saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is
   poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.

   ^3He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a
   lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation, as
   if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed
   an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
   delighteth in their abominations.

   ^4I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon
   them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did
   not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I
   delighted not.

   ^5Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; your brethren
   that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the
   Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be
   ashamed.

   ^6A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of
   the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies.

   ^7Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she
   was delivered of a man child.

   ^8Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the
   earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
   once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

   ^9Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the
   Lord: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God.

   ^10Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love
   her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:

   ^11That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her
   consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance
   of her glory.

   ^12For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a
   river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall
   ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her
   knees.

   ^13As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye
   shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

   ^14And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall
   flourish like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward
   his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

   ^15For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots
   like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with
   flames of fire.

   ^16For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and
   the slain of the Lord shall be many.

   ^17They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens
   behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the
   abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord.

   ^18For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I
   will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my
   glory.

   ^19And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape
   of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow,
   to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my
   fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among
   the Gentiles.

   ^20And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord
   out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and
   upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith
   the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel
   into the house of the Lord.

   ^21And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the
   Lord.

   ^22For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall
   remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name
   remain.

   ^23And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and
   from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
   saith the Lord.

   ^24And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that
   have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither
   shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all
   flesh.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of the Prophet

Jeremiah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in
   Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

   ^2To whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah the son of
   Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.

   ^3It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
   Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah
   king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth
   month.

   ^4Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^5Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest
   forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet
   unto the nations.

   ^6Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.

   ^7But the Lord said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go
   to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt
   speak.

   ^8Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee,
   saith the Lord.

   ^9Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord
   said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.

   ^10See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the
   kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
   down, to build, and to plant.

   ^11Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what
   seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.

   ^12Then said the Lord unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will hasten
   my word to perform it.

   ^13And the word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying, What
   seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot; and the face thereof is
   toward the north.

   ^14Then the Lord said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break
   forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

   ^15For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north,
   saith the Lord; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his
   throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the
   walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Judah.

   ^16And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their
   wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other
   gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.

   ^17Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all
   that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound
   thee before them.

   ^18For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron
   pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the kings of
   Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and
   against the people of the land.

   ^19And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail
   against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

   ^2Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord; I
   remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals,
   when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not
   sown.

   ^3Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the firstfruits of his
   increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them,
   saith the Lord.

   ^4Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the families
   of the house of Israel:

   ^5Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me,
   that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are
   become vain?

   ^6Neither said they, Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the
   land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of
   deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of
   death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man
   dwelt?

   ^7And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof
   and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and
   made mine heritage an abomination.

   ^8The priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that handle the law
   knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the prophets
   prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.

   ^9Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the Lord, and with your
   children's children will I plead.

   ^10For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar,
   and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.

   ^11Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my
   people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.

   ^12Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye
   very desolate, saith the Lord.

   ^13For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
   fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
   cisterns, that can hold no water.

   ^14Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?

   ^15The young lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made his land
   waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.

   ^16Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy
   head.

   ^17Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken
   the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way?

   ^18And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the
   waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to
   drink the waters of the river?

   ^19Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
   reprove thee: know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and
   bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is
   not in thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

   ^20For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and
   thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and under
   every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

   ^21Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then
   art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?

   ^22For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much sope, yet
   thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^23How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim?
   see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift
   dromedary traversing her ways;

   ^24A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her
   pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her
   will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.

   ^25Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but
   thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and
   after them will I go.

   ^26As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel
   ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their
   prophets,

   ^27Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast
   brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not
   their face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and
   save us.

   ^28But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if
   they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the
   number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.

   ^29Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against
   me, saith the Lord.

   ^30In vain have I smitten your children; they received no correction:
   your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion.

   ^31O generation, see ye the word of the Lord. Have I been a wilderness
   unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are lords;
   we will come no more unto thee?

   ^32Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my
   people have forgotten me days without number.

   ^33Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also
   taught the wicked ones thy ways.

   ^34Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor
   innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.

   ^35Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn
   from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have
   not sinned.

   ^36Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be
   ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.

   ^37Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head:
   for the Lord hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper
   in them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become
   another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be
   greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet
   return again to me, saith the Lord.

   ^2Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast not
   been lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian in
   the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms and
   with thy wickedness.

   ^3Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no
   latter rain; and thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be
   ashamed.

   ^4Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the
   guide of my youth?

   ^5Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end?
   Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest.

   ^6The Lord said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou
   seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every
   high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the
   harlot.

   ^7And I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me.
   But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.

   ^8And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel
   committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce;
   yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the
   harlot also.

   ^9And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she
   defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks.

   ^10And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned
   unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the Lord.

   ^11And the Lord said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified
   herself more than treacherous Judah.

   ^12Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou
   backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger to
   fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep
   anger for ever.

   ^13Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against
   the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under
   every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the Lord.

   ^14Turn, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto
   you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will
   bring you to Zion:

   ^15And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall
   feed you with knowledge and understanding.

   ^16And it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in
   the land, in those days, saith the Lord, they shall say no more, The
   ark of the covenant of the Lord: neither shall it come to mind: neither
   shall they remember it; neither shall they visit it; neither shall that
   be done any more.

   ^17At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord; and
   all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to
   Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of
   their evil heart.

   ^18In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of
   Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to
   the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.

   ^19But I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a
   pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said,
   Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.

   ^20Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have
   ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.

   ^21A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of
   the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they
   have forgotten the Lord their God.

   ^22Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings.
   Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God.

   ^23Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the
   multitude of mountains: truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of
   Israel.

   ^24For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth;
   their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

   ^25We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we have
   sinned against the Lord our God, we and our fathers, from our youth
   even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me: and if
   thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou
   not remove.

   ^2And thou shalt swear, The Lord liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in
   righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in
   him shall they glory.

   ^3For thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break up
   your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

   ^4Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of
   your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury
   come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the
   evil of your doings.

   ^5Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the
   trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Assemble
   yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities.

   ^6Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I will bring
   evil from the north, and a great destruction.

   ^7The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the
   Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy
   land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an
   inhabitant.

   ^8For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce
   anger of the Lord is not turned back from us.

   ^9And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the Lord, that the heart
   of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests
   shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.

   ^10Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! surely thou hast greatly deceived this
   people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword
   reacheth unto the soul.

   ^11At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry
   wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of my
   people, not to fan, nor to cleanse,

   ^12Even a full wind from those places shall come unto me: now also will
   I give sentence against them.

   ^13Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as a
   whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are
   spoiled.

   ^14O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be
   saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

   ^15For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount
   Ephraim.

   ^16Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem,
   that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against
   the cities of Judah.

   ^17As keepers of a field, are they against her round about; because she
   hath been rebellious against me, saith the Lord.

   ^18Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is
   thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine
   heart.

   ^19My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh
   a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my
   soul, the sound of the trump, the alarm of war.

   ^20Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is
   spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.

   ^21How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the
   trumpet?

   ^22For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish
   children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil,
   but to do good they have no knowledge.

   ^23I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and the
   heavens, and they had no light.

   ^24I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills
   moved lightly.

   ^25I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the
   heavens were fled.

   ^26I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the
   cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his
   fierce anger.

   ^27For thus hath the Lord said, The whole land shall be desolate; yet
   will I not make a full end.

   ^28For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black:
   because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not repent,
   neither will I turn back from it.

   ^29The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen;
   they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city
   shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.

   ^30And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest
   thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold,
   though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make
   thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.

   ^31For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish
   as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the
   daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands,
   saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and
   know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if
   there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I
   will pardon it.

   ^2And though they say, The Lord liveth; surely they swear falsely.

   ^3O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them,
   but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have
   refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a
   rock; they have refused to return.

   ^4Therefore I said, Surely these are poor; they are foolish: for they
   know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God.

   ^5I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they
   have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but
   these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

   ^6Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the
   evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities:
   every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their
   transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased.

   ^7How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and
   sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they
   then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the
   harlots' houses.

   ^8They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his
   neighbour's wife.

   ^9Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: and shall not my
   soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

   ^10Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take
   away her battlements; for they are not the Lord'S.

   ^11For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very
   treacherously against me, saith the Lord.

   ^12They have belied the Lord, and said, It is not he; neither shall
   evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine:

   ^13And the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them:
   thus shall it be done unto them.

   ^14Wherefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Because ye speak this
   word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people
   wood, and it shall devour them.

   ^15Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel,
   saith the Lord: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a
   nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they
   say.

   ^16Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.

   ^17And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons
   and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thine
   herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall
   impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

   ^18Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I will not make a full
   end with you.

   ^19And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth the
   Lord our God all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them,
   Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so
   shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.

   ^20Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying,

   ^21Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding; which
   have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not:

   ^22Fear ye not me? saith the Lord: will ye not tremble at my presence,
   which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual
   decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss
   themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they
   not pass over it?

   ^23But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are
   revolted and gone.

   ^24Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God,
   that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season: he
   reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

   ^25Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
   withholden good things from you.

   ^26For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that
   setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.

   ^27As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit:
   therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.

   ^28They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the
   wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they
   prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.

   ^29Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my
   soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

   ^30A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land;

   ^31The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their
   means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end
   thereof?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee out of the midst
   of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire
   in Beth-haccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great
   destruction.

   ^2I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate woman.

   ^3The shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall pitch
   their tents against her round about; they shall feed every one in his
   place.

   ^4Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe unto
   us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are
   stretched out.

   ^5Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces.

   ^6For thus hath the Lord of hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and cast a
   mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited; she is wholly
   oppression in the midst of her.

   ^7As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her
   wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continually
   is grief and wounds.

   ^8Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest
   I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall throughly glean the remnant
   of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the
   baskets.

   ^10To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold,
   their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the word
   of the Lord is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it.

   ^11Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding
   in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly
   of young men together: for even the husband with the wife shall be
   taken, the aged with him that is full of days.

   ^12And their houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields and
   wives together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of
   the land, saith the Lord.

   ^13For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one
   is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest
   every one dealeth falsely.

   ^14They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people
   slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

   ^15Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they
   were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall
   fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be
   cast down, saith the Lord.

   ^16Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the
   old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
   rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk therein.

   ^17Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the
   trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.

   ^18Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is among
   them.

   ^19Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the
   fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words,
   nor to my law, but rejected it.

   ^20To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet
   cane from a far country? your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor
   your sacrifices sweet unto me.

   ^21Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks
   before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall
   upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.

   ^22Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people cometh from the north country,
   and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of the earth.

   ^23They shall lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no
   mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses, set
   in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of Zion.

   ^24We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax feeble: anguish hath
   taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

   ^25Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword of
   the enemy and fear is on every side.

   ^26O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow
   thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter
   lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.

   ^27I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that
   thou mayest know and try their way.

   ^28They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders: they are
   brass and iron; they are all corrupters.

   ^29The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the
   founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.

   ^30Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Stand in the gate of the Lord'S house, and proclaim there this word,
   and say, Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at
   these gates to worship the Lord.

   ^3Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and
   your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.

   ^4Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, The
   temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, are these.

   ^5For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly
   execute judgment between a man and his neighbour;

   ^6If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and
   shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to
   your hurt:

   ^7Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave
   to your fathers, for ever and ever.

   ^8Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.

   ^9Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and
   burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;

   ^10And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
   name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?

   ^11Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers
   in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord.

   ^12But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name
   at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people
   Israel.

   ^13And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and I
   spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I
   called you, but ye answered not;

   ^14Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name,
   wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your
   fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.

   ^15And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your
   brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.

   ^16Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor
   prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear
   thee.

   ^17Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the
   streets of Jerusalem?

   ^18The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the
   women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to
   pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to
   anger.

   ^19Do they provoke me to anger? saith the Lord: do they not provoke
   themselves to the confusion of their own faces?

   ^20Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, mine anger and my fury
   shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon
   the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall
   burn, and shall not be quenched.

   ^21Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt
   offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

   ^22For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day
   that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt
   offerings or sacrifices:

   ^23But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will
   be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways
   that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you.

   ^24But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the
   counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward,
   and not forward.

   ^25Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt
   unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets,
   daily rising up early and sending them:

   ^26Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened
   their neck: they did worse than their fathers.

   ^27Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will
   not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not
   answer thee.

   ^28But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the
   voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction: truth is
   perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

   ^29Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a
   lamentation on high places; for the Lord hath rejected and forsaken the
   generation of his wrath.

   ^30For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the
   Lord: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by
   my name, to pollute it.

   ^31And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the
   valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in
   the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.

   ^32Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no
   more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the
   valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no
   place.

   ^33And the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the
   heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall fray them away.

   ^34Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the
   streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness,
   the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land
   shall be desolate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   At that time, saith the Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the
   kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the
   priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:

   ^2And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the
   host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and
   after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they
   have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall
   be for dung upon the face of the earth.

   ^3And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them
   that remain of this evil family, which remain in all the places whither
   I have driven them, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^4Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord; Shall they
   fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return?

   ^5Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual
   backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.

   ^6I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him
   of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his
   course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

   ^7Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the
   turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming;
   but my people know not the judgment of the Lord.

   ^8How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo,
   certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the scribes is in vain.

   ^9The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have
   rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them?

   ^10Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to
   them that shall inherit them: for every one from the least even unto
   the greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the
   priest every one dealeth falsely.

   ^11For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly,
   saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

   ^12Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they
   were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they
   fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they shall
   be cast down, saith the Lord.

   ^13I will surely consume them, saith the Lord: there shall be no grapes
   on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade; and the
   things that I have given them shall pass away from them.

   ^14Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the
   defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the Lord our God hath
   put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have
   sinned against the Lord.

   ^15We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, and
   behold trouble!

   ^16The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land
   trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are
   come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and
   those that dwell therein.

   ^17For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which
   will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.

   ^18When I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in me.

   ^19Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of
   them that dwell in a far country: Is not the Lord in Zion? is not her
   king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven
   images, and with strange vanities?

   ^20The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.

   ^21For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black;
   astonishment hath taken hold on me.

   ^22Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then is
   not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
   might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!

   ^2Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men;
   that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all
   adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

   ^3And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not
   valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to
   evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord.

   ^4Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any
   brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour
   will walk with slanders.

   ^5And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak the
   truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary
   themselves to commit iniquity.

   ^6Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they
   refuse to know me, saith the Lord.

   ^7Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will melt them, and
   try them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people?

   ^8Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one
   speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he
   layeth his wait.

   ^9Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my
   soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

   ^10For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the
   habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned
   up, so that none can pass through them; neither can men hear the voice
   of the cattle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled;
   they are gone.

   ^11And I will make Jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I will
   make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.

   ^12Who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to whom
   the mouth of the Lord hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the
   land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth
   through?

   ^13And the Lord saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set
   before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein;

   ^14But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after
   Baalim, which their fathers taught them:

   ^15Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I
   will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of
   gall to drink.

   ^16I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor
   their fathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I
   have consumed them.

   ^17Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning
   women, that they may come; and send for cunning women, that they may
   come:

   ^18And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes
   may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.

   ^19For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we
   are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our
   dwellings have cast us out.

   ^20Yet hear the word of the Lord, O ye women, and let your ear receive
   the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one
   her neighbour lamentation.

   ^21For death is come up into our windows, and is entered into our
   palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men from
   the streets.

   ^22Speak, Thus saith the Lord, Even the carcases of men shall fall as
   dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and
   none shall gather them.

   ^23Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
   neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
   glory in his riches:

   ^24But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and
   knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment,
   and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith
   the Lord.

   ^25Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will punish all them
   which are circumcised with the uncircumcised;

   ^26Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and
   all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for
   all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are
   uncircumcised in the heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Hear ye the word which the Lord speaketh unto you, O house of Israel:

   ^2Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not
   dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them.

   ^3For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of
   the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.

   ^4They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and
   with hammers, that it move not.

   ^5They are upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs be
   borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they cannot
   do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.

   ^6Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord; thou art great,
   and thy name is great in might.

   ^7Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for to thee doth it
   appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in
   all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

   ^8But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a doctrine
   of vanities.

   ^9Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from
   Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue
   and purple is their clothing: they are all the work of cunning men.

   ^10But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an
   everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations
   shall not be able to abide his indignation.

   ^11Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens
   and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under
   these heavens.

   ^12He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world
   by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion.

   ^13When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the
   heavens, and he causeth the vapors to ascend from the ends of the
   earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
   of his treasures.

   ^14Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is confounded
   by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no
   breath in them.

   ^15They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their
   visitation they shall perish.

   ^16The portion of Jacob is not like them: for he is the former of all
   things; and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: The Lord of hosts is
   his name.

   ^17Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortress.

   ^18For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of
   the land at this once, and will distress them, that they may find it
   so.

   ^19Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous: but I said, Truly this
   is a grief, and I must bear it.

   ^20My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my children
   are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth
   my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

   ^21For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord:
   therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be
   scattered.

   ^22Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion out of
   the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of
   dragons.

   ^23O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in
   man that walketh to direct his steps.

   ^24O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou
   bring me to nothing.

   ^25Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the
   families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and
   devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah,
   and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

   ^3And say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Cursed be
   the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant,

   ^4Which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth
   out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice,
   and do them, according to all which I command you: so shall ye be my
   people, and I will be your God:

   ^5That I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to
   give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. Then
   answered I, and said, So be it, O Lord.

   ^6Then the Lord said unto me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of
   Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of
   this covenant, and do them.

   ^7For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I brought
   them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising early and
   protesting, saying, Obey my voice.

   ^8Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in
   the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon them
   all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do; but they
   did them not.

   ^9And the Lord said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of
   Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

   ^10They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which
   refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to serve them:
   the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant
   which I made with their fathers.

   ^11Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon them,
   which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto
   me, I will not hearken unto them.

   ^12Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and
   cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not save
   them at all in the time of their trouble.

   ^13For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah;
   and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up
   altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto Baal.

   ^14Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or
   prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry
   unto me for their trouble.

   ^15What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought
   lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou
   doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

   ^16The Lord called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, and of goodly
   fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it,
   and the branches of it are broken.

   ^17For the Lord of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil
   against thee, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of
   Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger
   in offering incense unto Baal.

   ^18And the Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then thou
   shewedst me their doings.

   ^19But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; and
   I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us
   destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from
   the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.

   ^20But, O Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the
   reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee
   have I revealed my cause.

   ^21Therefore thus saith the Lord of the men of Anathoth, that seek thy
   life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not
   by our hand:

   ^22Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will punish them:
   the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters
   shall die by famine:

   ^23And there shall be no remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon
   the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk
   with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked
   prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

   ^2Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow, yea,
   they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from
   their reins.

   ^3But thou, O Lord, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tried mine heart
   toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare
   them for the day of slaughter.

   ^4How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither,
   for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are consumed,
   and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last end.

   ^5If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then
   how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace,
   wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the
   swelling of Jordan?

   ^6For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have
   dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they have called a multitude after
   thee: believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee.

   ^7I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given
   the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.

   ^8Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out
   against me: therefore have I hated it.

   ^9Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about
   are against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to
   devour.

   ^10Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my
   portion under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
   wilderness.

   ^11They have made it desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto me;
   the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart.

   ^12The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness:
   for the sword of the Lord shall devour from the one end of the land
   even to the other end of the land: no flesh shall have peace.

   ^13They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put
   themselves to pain, but shall not profit: and they shall be ashamed of
   your revenues because of the fierce anger of the Lord.

   ^14Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbours, that touch the
   inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I
   will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah
   from among them.

   ^15And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I will
   return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again, every
   man to his heritage, and every man to his land.

   ^16And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of
   my people, to swear by my name, The Lord liveth; as they taught my
   people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the midst of my
   people.

   ^17But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that
   nation, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   Thus saith the Lord unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and put it
   upon thy loins, and put it not in water.

   ^2So I got a girdle according to the word of the Lord, and put it on my
   loins.

   ^3And the word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying,

   ^4Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is upon thy loins, and
   arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.

   ^5So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the Lord commanded me.

   ^6And it came to pass after many days, that the Lord said unto me,
   Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I
   commanded thee to hide there.

   ^7Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the
   place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was
   profitable for nothing.

   ^8Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^9Thus saith the Lord, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah,
   and the great pride of Jerusalem.

   ^10This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the
   imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them,
   and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good for
   nothing.

   ^11For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused
   to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of
   Judah, saith the Lord; that they might be unto me for a people, and for
   a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear.

   ^12Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the Lord
   God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall
   say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be
   filled with wine?

   ^13Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will
   fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon
   David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

   ^14And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the
   sons together, saith the Lord: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have
   mercy, but destroy them.

   ^15Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the Lord hath spoken.

   ^16Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
   before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look
   for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
   darkness.

   ^17But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for
   your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears,
   because the Lord'S flock is carried away captive.

   ^18Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for
   your principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory.

   ^19The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open them:
   Judah shall be carried away captive all of it, it shall be wholly
   carried away captive.

   ^20Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where
   is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?

   ^21What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught
   them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take
   thee, as a woman in travail?

   ^22And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me?
   For the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy
   heels made bare.

   ^23Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then
   may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

   ^24Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away by
   the wind of the wilderness.

   ^25This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the
   Lord; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.

   ^26Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame
   may appear.

   ^27I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy
   whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto
   thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it once be?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth.

   ^2Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto
   the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

   ^3And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came
   to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels
   empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.

   ^4Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the
   plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.

   ^5Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook it, because there
   was no grass.

   ^6And the wild asses did stand in the high places, they snuffed up the
   wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because there was no grass.

   ^7O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy
   name's sake: for our backslidings are many; we have sinned against
   thee.

   ^8O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why
   shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man
   that turneth aside to tarry for a night?

   ^9Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man that cannot
   save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by
   thy name; leave us not.

   ^10Thus saith the Lord unto this people, Thus have they loved to
   wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord doth not
   accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins.

   ^11Then said the Lord unto me, Pray not for this people for their good.

   ^12When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt
   offering and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume
   them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

   ^13Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye
   shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give
   you assured peace in this place.

   ^14Then the Lord said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I
   sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them:
   they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of
   nought, and the deceit of their heart.

   ^15Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that prophesy
   in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall
   not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those prophets be
   consumed.

   ^16And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the
   streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they
   shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor
   their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them.

   ^17Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run down
   with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin
   daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very
   grievous blow.

   ^18If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword!
   and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with
   famine! yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a land that
   they know not.

   ^19Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why
   hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for
   peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold
   trouble!

   ^20We acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our
   fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

   ^21Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of
   thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

   ^22Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause
   rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, O Lord our God?
   therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these things.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   Then said the Lord unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me,
   yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight,
   and let them go forth.

   ^2And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall we go
   forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the Lord; Such as are for
   death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such
   as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
   captivity, to the captivity.

   ^3And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord: the sword to
   slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts
   of the earth, to devour and destroy.

   ^4And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth,
   because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which
   he did in Jerusalem.

   ^5For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan
   thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?

   ^6Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou art gone backward:
   therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I
   am weary with repenting.

   ^7And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will
   bereave them of children, I will destroy my people, since they return
   not from their ways.

   ^8Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I have
   brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler at
   noonday: I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors upon
   the city.

   ^9She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the ghost;
   her sun is gone down while it was yet day: she hath been ashamed and
   confounded: and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before
   their enemies, saith the Lord.

   ^10Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a
   man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor
   men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth curse me.

   ^11The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy remnant; verily I
   will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil and in
   the time of affliction.

   ^12Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?

   ^13Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without
   price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

   ^14And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which
   thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn
   upon you.

   ^15O Lord, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of
   my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that for
   thy sake I have suffered rebuke.

   ^16Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me
   the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O
   Lord God of hosts.

   ^17I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone
   because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation.

   ^18Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to
   be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters
   that fail?

   ^19Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring
   thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the
   precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto
   thee; but return not thou unto them.

   ^20And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and they
   shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for
   I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord.

   ^21And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will
   redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   The word of the Lord came also unto me, saying,

   ^2Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or
   daughters in this place.

   ^3For thus saith the Lord concerning the sons and concerning the
   daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers
   that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this
   land;

   ^4They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented;
   neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face
   of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine;
   and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the
   beasts of the earth.

   ^5For thus saith the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning,
   neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace
   from this people, saith the Lord, even lovingkindness and mercies.

   ^6Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall not
   be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor
   make themselves bald for them:

   ^7Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort
   them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cup of consolation
   to drink for their father or for their mother.

   ^8Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them
   to eat and to drink.

   ^9For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will
   cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the
   voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom,
   and the voice of the bride.

   ^10And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all
   these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the Lord
   pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or
   what is our sin that we have committed against the Lord our God?

   ^11Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken
   me, saith the Lord, and have walked after other gods, and have served
   them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept
   my law;

   ^12And ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every
   one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken
   unto me:

   ^13Therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know
   not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods
   day and night; where I will not shew you favour.

   ^14Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no
   more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel
   out of the land of Egypt;

   ^15But, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from
   the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven
   them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto
   their fathers.

   ^16Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall
   fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt
   them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of
   the rocks.

   ^17For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my
   face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.

   ^18And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double;
   because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance
   with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things.

   ^19O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of
   affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
   earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity,
   and things wherein there is no profit.

   ^20Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?

   ^21Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause
   them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name
   is The Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
   diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns
   of your altars;

   ^2Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the
   green trees upon the high hills.

   ^3O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy
   treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin, throughout all thy
   borders.

   ^4And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I
   gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land
   which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which
   shall burn for ever.

   ^5Thus saith the Lord; Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and
   maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.

   ^6For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when
   good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in
   a salt land and not inhabited.

   ^7Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord
   is.

   ^8For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth
   out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her
   leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought,
   neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

   ^9The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who
   can know it?

   ^10I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
   according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

   ^11As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that
   getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
   days, and at his end shall be a fool.

   ^12A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our
   sanctuary.

   ^13O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed,
   and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because
   they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.

   ^14Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be
   saved: for thou art my praise.

   ^15Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord? let it come
   now.

   ^16As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee:
   neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came
   out of my lips was right before thee.

   ^17Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil.

   ^18Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be
   confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring
   upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.

   ^19Thus said the Lord unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the children
   of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the which
   they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem;

   ^20And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah,
   and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by
   these gates:

   ^21Thus saith the Lord; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on
   the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem;

   ^22Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day,
   neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded
   your fathers.

   ^23But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck
   stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.

   ^24And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith
   the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the
   sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;

   ^25Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes
   sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses,
   they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.

   ^26And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places
   about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and
   from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt offerings, and
   sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing sacrifices of
   praise, unto the house of the Lord.

   ^27But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day, and
   not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the
   sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it
   shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee
   to hear my words.

   ^3Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he wrought a
   work on the wheels.

   ^4And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the
   potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the
   potter to make it.

   ^5Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

   ^6O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the
   Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine
   hand, O house of Israel.

   ^7At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
   kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it;

   ^8If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil,
   I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

   ^9And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning
   a kingdom, to build and to plant it;

   ^10If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will
   repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them.

   ^11Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I frame
   evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every
   one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good.

   ^12And they said, There is no hope: but we will walk after our own
   devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.

   ^13Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ask ye now among the heathen, who
   hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible
   thing.

   ^14Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock of
   the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another
   place be forsaken?

   ^15Because my people hath forgotten me, they have burned incense to
   vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the
   ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up;

   ^16To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hissing; every one that
   passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head.

   ^17I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will
   shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity.

   ^18Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah;
   for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
   wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with
   the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

   ^19Give heed to me, O Lord, and hearken to the voice of them that
   contend with me.

   ^20Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit for
   my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and
   to turn away thy wrath from them.

   ^21Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out
   their blood by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved
   of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death;
   let their young men be slain by the sword in battle.

   ^22Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a troop
   suddenly upon them: for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid
   snares for my feet.

   ^23Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me:
   forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight,
   but let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the time
   of thine anger.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   Thus saith the Lord, Go and get a potter's earthen bottle, and take of
   the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests;

   ^2And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the
   entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell
   thee,

   ^3And say, Hear ye the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah, and
   inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of
   Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever
   heareth, his ears shall tingle.

   ^4Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and
   have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their
   fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place
   with the blood of innocents;

   ^5They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with
   fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake
   it, neither came it into my mind:

   ^6Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that this place
   shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom,
   but The valley of slaughter.

   ^7And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this
   place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies,
   and by the hands of them that seek their lives: and their carcases will
   I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of
   the earth.

   ^8And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that
   passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues
   thereof.

   ^9And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of
   their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend
   in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that
   seek their lives, shall straiten them.

   ^10Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go
   with thee,

   ^11And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Even so will
   I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter's vessel,
   that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury them in Tophet,
   till there be no place to bury.

   ^12Thus will I do unto this place, saith the Lord, and to the
   inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as Tophet:

   ^13And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah,
   shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon
   whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and
   have poured out drink offerings unto other gods.

   ^14Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the Lord had sent him to
   prophesy; and he stood in the court of the Lord'S house; and said to
   all the people,

   ^15Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will
   bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have
   pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that
   they might not hear my words.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in
   the house of the Lord, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things.

   ^2Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks
   that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the
   Lord.

   ^3And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah
   out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The Lord hath not
   called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib.

   ^4For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will make thee a terror to
   thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of
   their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all
   Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them
   captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.

   ^5Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all the
   labours thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the
   treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their
   enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to
   Babylon.

   ^6And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into
   captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die,
   and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast
   prophesied lies.

   ^7O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived: thou art stronger
   than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh
   me.

   ^8For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because
   the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision,
   daily.

   ^9Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in
   his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in
   my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.

   ^10For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say
   they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting,
   saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against
   him, and we shall take our revenge on him.

   ^11But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my
   persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be
   greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their everlasting
   confusion shall never be forgotten.

   ^12But, O Lord of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the reins
   and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I
   opened my cause.

   ^13Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord: for he hath delivered the
   soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.

   ^14Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my
   mother bare me be blessed.

   ^15Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man
   child is born unto thee; making him very glad.

   ^16And let that man be as the cities which the Lord overthrew, and
   repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting
   at noontide;

   ^17Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have
   been my grave, and her womb to be always great with me.

   ^18Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow,
   that my days should be consumed with shame?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when king Zedekiah
   sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of
   Maaseiah the priest, saying,

   ^2Enquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of
   Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that the Lord will deal with us
   according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.

   ^3Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah:

   ^4Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the
   weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the
   king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without
   the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city.

   ^5And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and
   with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

   ^6And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast:
   they shall die of a great pestilence.

   ^7And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah,
   and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city
   from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand
   of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies,
   and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall smite
   them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have
   pity, nor have mercy.

   ^8And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I
   set before you the way of life, and the way of death.

   ^9He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the
   famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to
   the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be
   unto him for a prey.

   ^10For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good,
   saith the Lord: it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon,
   and he shall burn it with fire.

   ^11And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word
   of the Lord;

   ^12O house of David, thus saith the Lord; Execute judgment in the
   morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the
   oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench
   it, because of the evil of your doings.

   ^13Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of
   the plain, saith the Lord; which say, Who shall come down against us?
   or who shall enter into our habitations?

   ^14But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith
   the Lord: and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall
   devour all things round about it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   Thus saith the Lord; Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and
   speak there this word,

   ^2And say, Hear the word of the Lord, O king of Judah, that sittest
   upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that
   enter in by these gates:

   ^3Thus saith the Lord; Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and
   deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong,
   do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither
   shed innocent blood in this place.

   ^4For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the
   gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in
   chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.

   ^5But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the
   Lord, that this house shall become a desolation.

   ^6For thus saith the Lord unto the king's house of Judah; Thou art
   Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: yet surely I will make thee a
   wilderness, and cities which are not inhabited.

   ^7And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his
   weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into
   the fire.

   ^8And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every
   man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this great
   city?

   ^9Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of
   the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.

   ^10Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for him
   that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native
   country.

   ^11For thus saith the Lord touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of
   Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out
   of this place; He shall not return thither any more:

   ^12But he shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and
   shall see this land no more.

   ^13Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his
   chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages,
   and giveth him not for his work;

   ^14That saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and
   cutteth him out windows; and it is cieled with cedar, and painted with
   vermilion.

   ^15Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy
   father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well
   with him?

   ^16He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well with
   him: was not this to know me? saith the Lord.

   ^17But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and
   for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do
   it.

   ^18Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
   king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother!
   or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah
   his glory!

   ^19He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth
   beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

   ^20Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry
   from the passages: for all thy lovers are destroyed.

   ^21I spake unto thee in thy prosperity; but thou saidst, I will not
   hear. This hath been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not
   my voice.

   ^22The wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go into
   captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy
   wickedness.

   ^23O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how
   gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a
   woman in travail!

   ^24As I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king
   of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee
   thence;

   ^25And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and
   into the hand of them whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.

   ^26And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into
   another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.

   ^27But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall they
   not return.

   ^28Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel wherein is
   no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast
   into a land which they know not?

   ^29O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord.

   ^30Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man childless, a man that shall
   not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting
   upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
   pasture! saith the Lord.

   ^2Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that
   feed my people; Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and
   have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your
   doings, saith the Lord.

   ^3And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
   whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds;
   and they shall be fruitful and increase.

   ^4And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and they
   shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking,
   saith the Lord.

   ^5Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
   righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
   judgment and justice in the earth.

   ^6In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and
   this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE Lord OUR
   RIGHTEOUSNESS.

   ^7Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no
   more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out
   of the land of Egypt;

   ^8But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the
   house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries
   whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land.

   ^9Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones
   shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome,
   because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness.

   ^10For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land
   mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their
   course is evil, and their force is not right.

   ^11For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I
   found their wickedness, saith the Lord.

   ^12Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the
   darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring
   evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.

   ^13And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in
   Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

   ^14I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing:
   they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands
   of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness: they are all
   of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.

   ^15Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the prophets;
   Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water
   of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth
   into all the land.

   ^16Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
   prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a
   vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

   ^17They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, Ye
   shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the
   imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.

   ^18For who hath stood in the counsel of the Lord, and hath perceived
   and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it?

   ^19Behold, a whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a
   grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the
   wicked.

   ^20The anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have executed, and
   till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye
   shall consider it perfectly.

   ^21I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to
   them, yet they prophesied.

   ^22But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to
   hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way,
   and from the evil of their doings.

   ^23Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off?

   ^24Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him?
   saith the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.

   ^25I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name,
   saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

   ^26How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy
   lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart;

   ^27Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams
   which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have
   forgotten my name for Baal.

   ^28The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that
   hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to
   the wheat? saith the Lord.

   ^29Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer
   that breaketh the rock in pieces?

   ^30Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that
   steal my words every one from his neighbour.

   ^31Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that use their
   tongues, and say, He saith.

   ^32Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the
   Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and
   by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore
   they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord.

   ^33And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee,
   saying, What is the burden of the Lord? thou shalt then say unto them,
   What burden? I will even forsake you, saith the Lord.

   ^34And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shall
   say, The burden of the Lord, I will even punish that man and his house.

   ^35Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his
   brother, What hath the Lord answered? and, What hath the Lord spoken?

   ^36And the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more: for every man's
   word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living
   God, of the Lord of hosts our God.

   ^37Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the Lord answered
   thee? and, What hath the Lord spoken?

   ^38But since ye say, The burden of the Lord; therefore thus saith the
   Lord; Because ye say this word, The burden of the Lord, and I have sent
   unto you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of the Lord;

   ^39Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and I will
   forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, and cast
   you out of my presence:

   ^40And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual
   shame, which shall not be forgotten.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   The Lord shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before
   the temple of the Lord, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had
   carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and
   the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem,
   and had brought them to Babylon.

   ^2One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first
   ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be
   eaten, they were so bad.

   ^3Then said the Lord unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said,
   Figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be
   eaten, they are so evil.

   ^4Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^5Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Like these good figs, so will
   I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have
   sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their good.

   ^6For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them
   again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them down; and
   I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

   ^7And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord: and
   they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return
   unto me with their whole heart.

   ^8And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely
   thus saith the Lord, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his
   princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and
   them that dwell in the land of Egypt:

   ^9And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the
   earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a
   curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.

   ^10And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among
   them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and
   to their fathers.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in
   the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was
   the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon;

   ^2The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah,
   and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,

   ^3From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah,
   even unto this day, that is the three and twentieth year, the word of
   the Lord hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early
   and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.

   ^4And the Lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising
   early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your
   ear to hear.

   ^5They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from
   the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the Lord hath given
   unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever:

   ^6And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and
   provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you
   no hurt.

   ^7Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the Lord; that ye might
   provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.

   ^8Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Because ye have not heard my
   words,

   ^9Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the
   Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will
   bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and
   against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them,
   and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual
   desolations.

   ^10Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of
   gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the
   sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.

   ^11And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and
   these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.

   ^12And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that
   I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for
   their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it
   perpetual desolations.

   ^13And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced
   against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath
   prophesied against all the nations.

   ^14For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them
   also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and
   according to the works of their own hands.

   ^15For thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup of
   this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee,
   to drink it.

   ^16And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword
   that I will send among them.

   ^17Then took I the cup at the Lord'S hand, and made all the nations to
   drink, unto whom the Lord had sent me:

   ^18To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof,
   and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an
   hissing, and a curse; as it is this day;

   ^19Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all
   his people;

   ^20And all the mingled people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, and
   all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah,
   and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod,

   ^21Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon,

   ^22And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the
   kings of the isles which are beyond the sea,

   ^23Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that are in the utmost corners,

   ^24And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people
   that dwell in the desert,

   ^25And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the
   kings of the Medes,

   ^26And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and
   all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth:
   and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.

   ^27Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts,
   the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and
   rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.

   ^28And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to
   drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ye
   shall certainly drink.

   ^29For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my
   name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished:
   for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth,
   saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^30Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto
   them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his
   holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall
   give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the
   inhabitants of the earth.

   ^31A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the Lord hath
   a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will
   give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord.

   ^32Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from
   nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the
   coasts of the earth.

   ^33And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the
   earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented,
   neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.

   ^34Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye
   principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your
   dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.

   ^35And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of
   the flock to escape.

   ^36A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal
   of the flock, shall be heard: for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture.

   ^37And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce
   anger of the Lord.

   ^38He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate
   because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce
   anger.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
   Judah came this word from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord; Stand in the court of the Lord'S house, and
   speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the Lord'S
   house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish
   not a word:

   ^3If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way,
   that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them
   because of the evil of their doings.

   ^4And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord; If ye will not
   hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you,

   ^5To hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto
   you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened;

   ^6Then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a
   curse to all the nations of the earth.

   ^7So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah
   speaking these words in the house of the Lord.

   ^8Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all
   that the Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the
   priests and the prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou
   shalt surely die.

   ^9Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house
   shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an
   inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the
   house of the Lord.

   ^10When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from
   the king's house unto the house of the Lord, and sat down in the entry
   of the new gate of the Lord'S house.

   ^11Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to all
   the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied
   against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.

   ^12Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people,
   saying, The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house and against
   this city all the words that ye have heard.

   ^13Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of
   the Lord your God; and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he
   hath pronounced against you.

   ^14As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good and
   meet unto you.

   ^15But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely
   bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the
   inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to
   speak all these words in your ears.

   ^16Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the
   prophets; This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us in
   the name of the Lord our God.

   ^17Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the
   assembly of the people, saying,

   ^18Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of
   Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the
   Lord of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall
   become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a
   forest.

   ^19Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death?
   did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented
   him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we
   procure great evil against our souls.

   ^20And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the Lord,
   Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjathjearim, who prophesied against
   this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah:

   ^21And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the
   princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but when
   Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt;

   ^22And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son
   of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt.

   ^23And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto
   Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body
   into the graves of the common people.

   ^24Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with
   Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to
   put him to death.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
   Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them
   upon thy neck,

   ^3And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to
   the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of
   Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto
   Zedekiah king of Judah;

   ^4And command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the Lord of
   hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say unto your masters;

   ^5I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the
   ground, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it
   unto whom it seemed meet unto me.

   ^6And now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar
   the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I
   given him also to serve him.

   ^7And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son,
   until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great
   kings shall serve themselves of him.

   ^8And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will not
   serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not
   put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will
   I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with
   the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.

   ^9Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor
   to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which
   speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:

   ^10For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land;
   and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.

   ^11But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of
   Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own
   land, saith the Lord; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

   ^12I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words,
   saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and
   serve him and his people, and live.

   ^13Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine,
   and by the pestilence, as the Lord hath spoken against the nation that
   will not serve the king of Babylon?

   ^14Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto
   you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy
   a lie unto you.

   ^15For I have not sent them, saith the Lord, yet they prophesy a lie in
   my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and
   the prophets that prophesy unto you.

   ^16Also I spake to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus
   saith the Lord; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy
   unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the Lord'S house shall now
   shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto
   you.

   ^17Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live:
   wherefore should this city be laid waste?

   ^18But if they be prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them,
   let them now make intercession to the Lord of hosts, that the vessels
   which are left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king
   of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.

   ^19For thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars, and
   concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the
   residue of the vessels that remain in this city,

   ^20Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away
   captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to
   Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;

   ^21Yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the
   vessels that remain in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the
   king of Judah and of Jerusalem;

   ^22They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be until the
   day that I visit them, saith the Lord; then will I bring them up, and
   restore them to this place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of
   Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month,
   that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake
   unto me in the house of the Lord, in the presence of the priests and of
   all the people, saying,

   ^2Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have
   broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

   ^3Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the
   vessels of the Lord'S house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took
   away from this place, and carried them to Babylon:

   ^4And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim
   king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon,
   saith the Lord: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.

   ^5Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the
   presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that
   stood in the house of the Lord,

   ^6Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the Lord do so: the Lord
   perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the
   vessels of the Lord'S house, and all that is carried away captive, from
   Babylon into this place.

   ^7Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and
   in the ears of all the people;

   ^8The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old
   prophesied both against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of
   war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

   ^9The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet
   shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath
   truly sent him.

   ^10Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet
   Jeremiah's neck, and brake it.

   ^11And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus
   saith the Lord; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of
   Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two full
   years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

   ^12Then the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that
   Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the
   prophet Jeremiah, saying,

   ^13Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Thou hast broken
   the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron.

   ^14For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put a
   yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve
   Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have
   given him the beasts of the field also.

   ^15Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now,
   Hananiah; The Lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to
   trust in a lie.

   ^16Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will cast thee from off the
   face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught
   rebellion against the Lord.

   ^17So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent
   from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were carried away
   captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the
   people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to
   Babylon;

   ^2(After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, the
   princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and the smiths,
   were departed from Jerusalem;)

   ^3By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of
   Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to
   Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon) saying,

   ^4Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all that are
   carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from
   Jerusalem unto Babylon;

   ^5Build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the
   fruit of them;

   ^6Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your
   sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and
   daughters; that ye may be increased there, and not diminished.

   ^7And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be
   carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace
   thereof shall ye have peace.

   ^8For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your
   prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you,
   neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.

   ^9For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them,
   saith the Lord.

   ^10For thus saith the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at
   Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in
   causing you to return to this place.

   ^11For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the Lord,
   thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

   ^12Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I
   will hearken unto you.

   ^13And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with
   all your heart.

   ^14And I will be found of you, saith the Lord: and I will turn away
   your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from
   all the places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord; and I will
   bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away
   captive.

   ^15Because ye have said, The Lord hath raised us up prophets in
   Babylon;

   ^16Know that thus saith the Lord of the king that sitteth upon the
   throne of David, and of all the people that dwelleth in this city, and
   of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity;

   ^17Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the
   sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile
   figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

   ^18And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with
   the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms
   of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a
   reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them:

   ^19Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the Lord, which I
   sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending
   them; but ye would not hear, saith the Lord.

   ^20Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord, all ye of the captivity,
   whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon:

   ^21Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of
   Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto
   you in my name; Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your
   eyes;

   ^22And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah
   which are in Babylon, saying, The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like
   Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire;

   ^23Because they have committed villany in Israel, and have committed
   adultery with their neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in
   my name, which I have not commanded them; even I know, and am a
   witness, saith the Lord.

   ^24Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying,

   ^25Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because
   thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that are at
   Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all
   the priests, saying,

   ^26The Lord hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest,
   that ye should be officers in the house of the Lord, for every man that
   is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in
   prison, and in the stocks.

   ^27Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which
   maketh himself a prophet to you?

   ^28For therefore he sent unto us in Babylon, saying, This captivity is
   long: build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat
   the fruit of them.

   ^29And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah
   the prophet.

   ^30Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,

   ^31Send to all them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the Lord
   concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath
   prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in
   a lie:

   ^32Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the
   Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this
   people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people,
   saith the Lord; because he hath taught rebellion against the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Thus speaketh the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the
   words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.

   ^3For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again the
   captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord: and I will
   cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they
   shall possess it.

   ^4And these are the words that the Lord spake concerning Israel and
   concerning Judah.

   ^5For thus saith the Lord; We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear,
   and not of peace.

   ^6Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore
   do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail,
   and all faces are turned into paleness?

   ^7Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the
   time of Jacob's trouble; but he shall be saved out of it.

   ^8For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that
   I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and
   strangers shall no more serve themselves of him:

   ^9But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king, whom I
   will raise up unto them.

   ^10Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the Lord; neither
   be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy
   seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and
   shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

   ^11For I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee: though I make a
   full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not
   make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will
   not leave thee altogether unpunished.

   ^12For thus saith the Lord, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is
   grievous.

   ^13There is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up: thou
   hast no healing medicines.

   ^14All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for I have
   wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a
   cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were
   increased.

   ^15Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for
   the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I
   have done these things unto thee.

   ^16Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine
   adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and they that
   spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give
   for a prey.

   ^17For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy
   wounds, saith the Lord; because they called thee an Outcast, saying,
   This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.

   ^18Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of
   Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city shall
   be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the
   manner thereof.

   ^19And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them
   that make merry: and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few; I
   will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.

   ^20Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation
   shall be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress
   them.

   ^21And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall
   proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and
   he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to
   approach unto me? saith the Lord.

   ^22And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

   ^23Behold, the whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth with fury, a
   continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the
   wicked.

   ^24The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have done
   it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter
   days ye shall consider it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   At the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families
   of Israel, and they shall be my people.

   ^2Thus saith the Lord, The people which were left of the sword found
   grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.

   ^3The Lord hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee
   with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn
   thee.

   ^4Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel:
   thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the
   dances of them that make merry.

   ^5Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the
   planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

   ^6For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim
   shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God.

   ^7For thus saith the Lord; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout
   among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord,
   save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

   ^8Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them
   from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the
   woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great
   company shall return thither.

   ^9They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead
   them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight
   way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and
   Ephraim is my firstborn.

   ^10Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles
   afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep
   him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

   ^11For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of
   him that was stronger than he.

   ^12Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall
   flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and
   for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul
   shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at
   all.

   ^13Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old
   together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort
   them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

   ^14And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my
   people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the Lord.

   ^15Thus saith the Lord; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and
   bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted
   for her children, because they were not.

   ^16Thus saith the Lord; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes
   from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord; and they
   shall come again from the land of the enemy.

   ^17And there is hope in thine end, saith the Lord, that thy children
   shall come again to their own border.

   ^18I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast
   chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the
   yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my
   God.

   ^19Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was
   instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded,
   because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

   ^20Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake
   against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
   troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.

   ^21Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart toward
   the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of
   Israel, turn again to these thy cities.

   ^22How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the
   Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a
   man.

   ^23Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they shall
   use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I
   shall bring again their captivity; The Lord bless thee, O habitation of
   justice, and mountain of holiness.

   ^24And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities thereof
   together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

   ^25For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every
   sorrowful soul.

   ^26Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me.

   ^27Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will sow the house of
   Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed
   of beast.

   ^28And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to
   pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to
   afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the
   Lord.

   ^29In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour
   grape, and the children's teeth are set on edge.

   ^30But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth
   the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.

   ^31Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new
   covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:

   ^32Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the
   day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
   Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
   them, saith the Lord:

   ^33But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of
   Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their
   inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and
   they shall be my people.

   ^34And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man
   his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from
   the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will
   forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

   ^35Thus saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and
   the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which
   divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The Lord of hosts is his
   name:

   ^36If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the Lord, then the
   seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever.

   ^37Thus saith the Lord; If heaven above can be measured, and the
   foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all
   the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the Lord.

   ^38Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the city shall be built
   to the Lord from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.

   ^39And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon the
   hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.

   ^40And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all
   the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate
   toward the east, shall be holy unto the Lord; it shall not be plucked
   up, nor thrown down any more for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of
   Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of
   Nebuchadrezzar.

   ^2For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah
   the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was in the
   king of Judah's house.

   ^3For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost
   thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will give this
   city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;

   ^4And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the
   Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of
   Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall
   behold his eyes;

   ^5And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I
   visit him, saith the Lord: though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall
   not prosper?

   ^6And Jeremiah said, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^7Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto thee,
   saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth: for the right of
   redemption is thine to buy it.

   ^8So Hanameel mine uncle's son came to me in the court of the prison
   according to the word of the Lord, and said unto me, Buy my field, I
   pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin:
   for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine; buy
   it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of the Lord.

   ^9And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle's son, that was in
   Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.

   ^10And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses,
   and weighed him the money in the balances.

   ^11So I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed
   according to the law and custom, and that which was open:

   ^12And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of
   Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle's son,
   and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the
   purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison.

   ^13And I charged Baruch before them, saying,

   ^14Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these
   evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and
   this evidence which is open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that
   they may continue many days.

   ^15For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and
   fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.

   ^16Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch
   the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the Lord, saying,

   ^17Ah Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy
   great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for
   thee:

   ^18Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the
   iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them:
   the Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of hosts, is his name,

   ^19Great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon
   all the ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his
   ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:

   ^20Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto
   this day, and in Israel, and among other men; and hast made thee a
   name, as at this day;

   ^21And hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt
   with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a
   stretched out arm, and with great terror;

   ^22And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their
   fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;

   ^23And they came in, and possessed it; but they obeyed not thy voice,
   neither walked in thy law; they have done nothing of all that thou
   commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast caused all this evil to
   come upon them:

   ^24Behold the mounts, they are come unto the city to take it; and the
   city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against it,
   because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: and
   what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.

   ^25And thou hast said unto me, O Lord GOD, Buy thee the field for
   money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the
   Chaldeans.

   ^26Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,

   ^27Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too
   hard for me?

   ^28Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give this city into
   the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of
   Babylon, and he shall take it:

   ^29And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set
   fire on this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they
   have offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto
   other gods, to provoke me to anger.

   ^30For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done
   evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have only
   provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the Lord.

   ^31For this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger and of
   my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I
   should remove it from before my face,

   ^32Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the
   children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they,
   their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the
   men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

   ^33And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though I
   taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not
   hearkened to receive instruction.

   ^34But they set their abominations in the house, which is called by my
   name, to defile it.

   ^35And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of
   the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass
   through the fire unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came
   it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah
   to sin.

   ^36And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning
   this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand of the
   king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence;

   ^37Behold, I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have
   driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I
   will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell
   safely:

   ^38And they shall be my people, and I will be their God:

   ^39And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me
   for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:

   ^40And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not
   turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
   hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

   ^41Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them
   in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.

   ^42For thus saith the Lord; Like as I have brought all this great evil
   upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have
   promised them.

   ^43And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is
   desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the
   Chaldeans.

   ^44Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal
   them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places
   about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the
   mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the
   south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   Moreover the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the second time, while
   he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord the maker thereof, the Lord that formed it, to
   establish it; the Lord is his name;

   ^3Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty
   things, which thou knowest not.

   ^4For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of
   this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are
   thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword;

   ^5They come to fight with the Chaldeans, but it is fill them with the
   dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and
   for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city.

   ^6Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and
   will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.

   ^7And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel
   to return, and will build them, as at the first.

   ^8And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have
   sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they
   have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me.

   ^9And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before
   all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do
   unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for
   all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

   ^10Thus saith the Lord; Again there shall be heard in this place, which
   ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast, even in the
   cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate,
   without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,

   ^11The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
   bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall
   say, Praise the Lord of hosts: for the Lord is good; for his mercy
   endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise
   into the house of the Lord. For I will cause to return the captivity of
   the land, as at the first, saith the Lord.

   ^12Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Again in this place, which is desolate
   without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, shall be
   an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.

   ^13In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and in
   the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places
   about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks pass
   again under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the Lord.

   ^14Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform that good
   thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house
   of Judah.

   ^15In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of
   righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and
   righteousness in the land.

   ^16In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
   safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord
   our righteousness.

   ^17For thus saith the Lord; David shall never want a man to sit upon
   the throne of the house of Israel;

   ^18Neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer
   burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice
   continually.

   ^19And the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying,

   ^20Thus saith the Lord; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my
   covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
   their season;

   ^21Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he
   should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites
   the priests, my ministers.

   ^22As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the
   sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and the
   Levites that minister unto me.

   ^23Moreover the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

   ^24Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two
   families which the Lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
   they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
   before them.

   ^25Thus saith the Lord; If my covenant be not with day and night, and
   if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth;

   ^26Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant, so
   that I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return,
   and have mercy on them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when Nebuchadnezzar
   king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of
   his dominion, and all the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against
   all the cities thereof, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king
   of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give this
   city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with
   fire:

   ^3And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken,
   and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of
   the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and
   thou shalt go to Babylon.

   ^4Yet hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith
   the Lord of thee, Thou shalt not die by the sword:

   ^5But thou shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers,
   the former kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for
   thee; and they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounced
   the word, saith the Lord.

   ^6Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah king of
   Judah in Jerusalem,

   ^7When the king of Babylon's army fought against Jerusalem, and against
   all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against
   Azekah: for these defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah.

   ^8This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, after that
   the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people which were at
   Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them;

   ^9That every man should let his manservant, and every man his
   maidservant, being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should
   serve himself of them, to wit, of a Jew his brother.

   ^10Now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered into
   the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and every
   one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves of them
   any more, then they obeyed, and let them go.

   ^11But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the
   handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into
   subjection for servants and for handmaids.

   ^12Therefore the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah from the Lord,
   saying,

   ^13Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; I made a covenant with your
   fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,
   out of the house of bondmen, saying,

   ^14At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew,
   which hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years,
   thou shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not
   unto me, neither inclined their ear.

   ^15And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in
   proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a
   covenant before me in the house which is called by my name:

   ^16But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his
   servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had set at liberty at
   their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto
   you for servants and for handmaids.

   ^17Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in
   proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his
   neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the
   sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be
   removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

   ^18And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which
   have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before
   me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts
   thereof,

   ^19The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and
   the priests, and all the people of the land, which passed between the
   parts of the calf;

   ^20I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the
   hand of them that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for
   meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.

   ^21And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand
   of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and
   into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which are gone up from
   you.

   ^22Behold, I will command, saith the Lord, and cause them to return to
   this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it
   with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without an
   inhabitant.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of
   Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

   ^2Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring
   them into the house of the Lord, into one of the chambers, and give
   them wine to drink.

   ^3Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and
   his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites;

   ^4And I brought them into the house of the Lord, into the chamber of
   the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the
   chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son
   of Shallum, the keeper of the door:

   ^5And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of
   wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine.

   ^6But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab
   our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye,
   nor your sons for ever:

   ^7Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor
   have any: but all your days ye shall dwell in tents; that ye may live
   many days in the land where ye be strangers.

   ^8Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father
   in all that he hath charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our
   wives, our sons, nor our daughters;

   ^9Nor to build houses for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor
   field, nor seed:

   ^10But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to
   all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

   ^11But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up
   into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear
   of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians:
   so we dwell at Jerusalem.

   ^12Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,

   ^13Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men
   of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive
   instruction to hearken to my words? saith the Lord.

   ^14The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons
   not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none,
   but obey their father's commandment: notwithstanding I have spoken unto
   you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto me.

   ^15I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up
   early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil
   way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them,
   and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your
   fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me.

   ^16Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the
   commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people
   hath not hearkened unto me:

   ^17Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel;
   Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them: because I
   have spoken unto them, but they have not heard; and I have called unto
   them, but they have not answered.

   ^18And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith the
   Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the
   commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done
   according unto all that he hath commanded you:

   ^19Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab
   the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
   king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

   ^2Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I
   have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against
   all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of
   Josiah, even into this day.

   ^3It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I
   purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil
   way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.

   ^4Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from
   the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, which he had spoken
   unto him, upon a roll of a book.

   ^5And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go into
   the house of the Lord:

   ^6Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from
   my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people in the Lord'S
   house upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears
   of all Judah that come out of their cities.

   ^7It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and
   will return every one from his evil way: for great is the anger and the
   fury that the Lord hath pronounced against this people.

   ^8And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the
   prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the Lord in the
   Lord'S house.

   ^9And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
   king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before
   the Lord to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that
   came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.

   ^10Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of
   the Lord, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in
   the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the Lord'S house, in
   the ears of all the people.

   ^11When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out
   of the book all the words of the Lord,

   ^12Then he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber:
   and, lo, all the princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and
   Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and
   Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all
   the princes.

   ^13Then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard,
   when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.

   ^14Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son
   of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine hand
   the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come. So
   Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto them.

   ^15And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So
   Baruch read it in their ears.

   ^16Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they were
   afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell
   the king of all these words.

   ^17And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How didst thou write all
   these words at his mouth?

   ^18Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words unto me
   with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.

   ^19Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah;
   and let no man know where ye be.

   ^20And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the
   roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words in
   the ears of the king.

   ^21So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of
   Elishama the scribe's chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the
   king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king.

   ^22Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there
   was a fire on the hearth burning before him.

   ^23And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves,
   he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the
   hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the
   hearth.

   ^24Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king,
   nor any of his servants that heard all these words.

   ^25Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession
   to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear
   them.

   ^26But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah
   the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the
   scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the Lord hid them.

   ^27Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, after that the king had
   burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of
   Jeremiah, saying,

   ^28Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words
   that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath
   burned.

   ^29And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim the king of Judah, Thus saith the
   Lord; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written
   therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy
   this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?

   ^30Therefore thus saith the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall
   have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be
   cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.

   ^31And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
   iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have
   pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.

   ^32Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe,
   the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the
   words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire:
   and there were added besides unto them many like words.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the son
   of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land
   of Judah.

   ^2But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did
   hearken unto the words of the Lord, which he spake by the prophet
   Jeremiah.

   ^3And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah
   the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray
   now unto the Lord our God for us.

   ^4Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not
   put him into prison.

   ^5Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the
   Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed
   from Jerusalem.

   ^6Then came the word of the Lord unto the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

   ^7Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the king
   of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold, Pharaoh's
   army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their
   own land.

   ^8And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and
   take it, and burn it with fire.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans
   shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.

   ^10For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight
   against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should
   they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.

   ^11And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken
   up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army,

   ^12Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of
   Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the people.

   ^13And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was
   there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of
   Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away
   to the Chaldeans.

   ^14Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans.
   But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him
   to the princes.

   ^15Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and
   put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had
   made that the prison.

   ^16When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and
   Jeremiah had remained there many days;

   ^17Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king asked
   him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from the Lord?
   And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into
   the hand of the king of Babylon.

   ^18Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended
   against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye
   have put me in prison?

   ^19Where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The
   king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?

   ^20Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my
   supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me
   not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

   ^21Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah
   into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a
   piece of bread out of the bakers street, until all the bread in the
   city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and
   Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the
   words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord, He that remaineth in this city shall die by the
   sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to
   the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life for a prey, and
   shall live.

   ^3Thus saith the Lord, This city shall surely be given into the hand of
   the king of Babylon's army, which shall take it.

   ^4Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let this
   man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war
   that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking
   such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this
   people, but the hurt.

   ^5Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the king
   is not he that can do any thing against you.

   ^6Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah
   the son of Hammelech, that was in the court of the prison: and they let
   down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but
   mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.

   ^7Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in
   the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the
   king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin;

   ^8Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's house, and spake to the
   king, saying,

   ^9My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done
   to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he
   is like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no
   more bread in the city.

   ^10Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from
   hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the
   dungeon, before he die.

   ^11So Ebed- melech took the men with him, and went into the house of
   the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old
   rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.

   ^12And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these old
   cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords. And
   Jeremiah did so.

   ^13So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the
   dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

   ^14Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him
   into the third entry that is in the house of the Lord: and the king
   said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.

   ^15Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thee, wilt
   thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou
   not hearken unto me?

   ^16So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the
   Lord liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put thee to death,
   neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life.

   ^17Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of
   hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king
   of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not
   be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:

   ^18But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then
   shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall
   burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.

   ^19And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews
   that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand,
   and they mock me.

   ^20But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech
   thee, the voice of the Lord, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be
   well unto thee, and thy soul shall live.

   ^21But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the Lord hath
   shewed me:

   ^22And, behold, all the women that are left in the king of Judah's
   house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's princes, and
   those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed
   against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away
   back.

   ^23So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the
   Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be
   taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this
   city to be burned with fire.

   ^24Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words,
   and thou shalt not die.

   ^25But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come
   unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast said
   unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death;
   also what the king said unto thee:

   ^26Then thou shalt say unto them, I presented my supplication before
   the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to
   die there.

   ^27Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he told
   them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they
   left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived.

   ^28So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that
   Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and
   they besieged it.

   ^2And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth
   day of the month, the city was broken up.

   ^3And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the
   middle gate, even Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab- saris,
   Nergal-sharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the
   king of Babylon.

   ^4And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them,
   and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of the city
   by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate betwixt the two
   walls: and he went out the way of the plain.

   ^5But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in
   the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought him up
   to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath,
   where he gave judgment upon him.

   ^6Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before
   his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah.

   ^7Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains, to
   carry him to Babylon.

   ^8And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the
   people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem.

   ^9Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into
   Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and those
   that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people that
   remained.

   ^10But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the
   people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them
   vineyards and fields at the same time.

   ^11Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah
   to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying,

   ^12Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him
   even as he shall say unto thee.

   ^13So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban,
   Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, Rabmag, and all the king of Babylon's
   princes;

   ^14Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison,
   and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
   that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the people.

   ^15Now the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in
   the court of the prison, saying,

   ^16Go and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the
   Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon
   this city for evil, and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in
   that day before thee.

   ^17But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord: and thou shalt
   not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.

   ^18For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the
   sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast
   put thy trust in me, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, after that Nebuzaradan
   the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken
   him being bound in chains among all that were carried away captive of
   Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive unto Babylon.

   ^2And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him, The
   Lord thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place.

   ^3Now the Lord hath brought it, and done according as he hath said:
   because ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed his voice,
   therefore this thing is come upon you.

   ^4And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which were
   upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into
   Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto
   thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is
   before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go,
   thither go.

   ^5Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to Gedaliah
   the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath
   made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the
   people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto thee to go. So the
   captain of the guard gave him victuals and a reward, and let him go.

   ^6Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and
   dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.

   ^7Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields,
   even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made
   Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed unto
   him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of them
   that were not carried away captive to Babylon;

   ^8Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the
   son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah
   the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

   ^9And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them and
   to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the
   land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.

   ^10As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah to serve the Chaldeans,
   which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruits, and
   oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye
   have taken.

   ^11Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the
   Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that
   the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set
   over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan;

   ^12Even all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were
   driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and
   gathered wine and summer fruits very much.

   ^13Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
   forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,

   ^14And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of
   the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But
   Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.

   ^15Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly,
   saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay thee,
   that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and
   the remnant in Judah perish?

   ^16But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah,
   Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of
   the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
   to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.

   ^2Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were
   with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with
   the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor
   over the land.

   ^3Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with
   Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the
   men of war.

   ^4And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and
   no man knew it,

   ^5That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria,
   even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent,
   and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to
   bring them to the house of the Lord.

   ^6And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them,
   weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met them, he
   said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.

   ^7And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that
   Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst of
   the pit, he, and the men that were with him.

   ^8But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us
   not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and
   of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their
   brethren.

   ^9Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the men,
   whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king had
   made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain.

   ^10Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that
   were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people that
   remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
   committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of
   Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the
   Ammonites.

   ^11But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
   forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son
   of Nethaniah had done,

   ^12Then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son
   of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.

   ^13Now it came to pass, that when all the people which were with
   Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
   forces that were with him, then they were glad.

   ^14So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah
   cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah.

   ^15But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight
   men, and went to the Ammonites.

   ^16Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
   forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had
   recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he
   had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and the
   women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again
   from Gibeon:

   ^17And they departed, and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is
   by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt,

   ^18Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them, because
   Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom
   the king of Babylon made governor in the land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and
   Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even
   unto the greatest, came near,

   ^2And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our
   supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us unto the Lord thy
   God, even for all this remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as
   thine eyes do behold us:)

   ^3That the Lord thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and
   the thing that we may do.

   ^4Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you; behold, I
   will pray unto the Lord your God according to your words; and it shall
   come to pass, that whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer you, I will
   declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you.

   ^5Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord be a true and faithful witness
   between us, if we do not even according to all things for the which the
   Lord thy God shall send thee to us.

   ^6Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of
   the Lord our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us,
   when we obey the voice of the Lord our God.

   ^7And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the Lord came
   unto Jeremiah.

   ^8Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
   forces which were with him, and all the people from the least even to
   the greatest,

   ^9And said unto them, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto whom
   ye sent me to present your supplication before him;

   ^10If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not
   pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent
   me of the evil that I have done unto you.

   ^11Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not
   afraid of him, saith the Lord: for I am with you to save you, and to
   deliver you from his hand.

   ^12And I will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon you,
   and cause you to return to your own land.

   ^13But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, neither obey the
   voice of the Lord your God,

   ^14Saying, No; but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall
   see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of
   bread; and there will we dwell:

   ^15And now therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah;
   Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your
   faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there;

   ^16Then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall
   overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye
   were afraid, shall follow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye
   shall die.

   ^17So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into
   Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and
   by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from the
   evil that I will bring upon them.

   ^18For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger
   and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
   so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into
   Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse,
   and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.

   ^19The Lord hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not
   into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day.

   ^20For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the Lord your
   God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God; and according unto all
   that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it.

   ^21And now I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not obeyed
   the voice of the Lord your God, nor any thing for the which he hath
   sent me unto you.

   ^22Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the
   famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go and
   to sojourn.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 43

   And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking
   unto all the people all the words of the Lord their God, for which the
   Lord their God had sent him to them, even all these words,

   ^2Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of
   Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest
   falsely: the Lord our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt
   to sojourn there:

   ^3But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us, for to
   deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to
   death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.

   ^4So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and
   all the people, obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to dwell in the land
   of Judah.

   ^5But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces,
   took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all nations,
   whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah;

   ^6Even men, and women, and children, and the king's daughters, and
   every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with
   Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the
   prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.

   ^7So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the voice of
   the Lord: thus came they even to Tahpanhes.

   ^8Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

   ^9Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the clay in the
   brickkiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in
   the sight of the men of Judah;

   ^10And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel;
   Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my
   servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and
   he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.

   ^11And when he cometh, he shall smite the land of Egypt, and deliver
   such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity to
   captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

   ^12And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he
   shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array
   himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment;
   and he shall go forth from thence in peace.

   ^13He shall break also the images of Bethshemesh, that is in the land
   of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he burn
   with fire.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 44

   The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in
   the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at
   Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have seen all the
   evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of
   Judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth
   therein,

   ^3Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me
   to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods,
   whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.

   ^4Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising early
   and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate.

   ^5But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their
   wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.

   ^6Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in
   the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are
   wasted and desolate, as at this day.

   ^7Therefore now thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of
   Israel; Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut
   off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave
   you none to remain;

   ^8In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands,
   burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be
   gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that ye might be a
   curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

   ^9Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness
   of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own
   wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed
   in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?

   ^10They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared,
   nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and
   before your fathers.

   ^11Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I
   will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah.

   ^12And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to
   go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be
   consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; they shall even be consumed by
   the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even unto
   the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be an
   execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.

   ^13For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have
   punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence:

   ^14So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into the land
   of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should
   return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire to
   return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as shall escape.

   ^15Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto
   other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, even
   all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered
   Jeremiah, saying,

   ^16As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the
   Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.

   ^17But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own
   mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
   offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings,
   and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
   Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw
   no evil.

   ^18But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to
   pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have
   been consumed by the sword and by the famine.

   ^19And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out
   drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and
   pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?

   ^20Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the
   women, and to all the people which had given him that answer, saying,

   ^21The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the
   streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your
   princes, and the people of the land, did not the Lord remember them,
   and came it not into his mind?

   ^22So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of your
   doings, and because of the abominations which ye have committed;
   therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse,
   without an inhabitant, as at this day.

   ^23Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against
   the Lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, nor walked in his
   law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil
   is happened unto you, as at this day.

   ^24Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women,
   Hear the word of the Lord, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt:

   ^25Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your
   wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand,
   saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn
   incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto
   her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows.

   ^26Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in the
   land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the Lord,
   that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in
   all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD liveth.

   ^27Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and all
   the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the
   sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.

   ^28Yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the
   land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah,
   that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose
   words shall stand, mine, or theirs.

   ^29And this shall be a sign unto you, saith the Lord, that I will
   punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely
   stand against you for evil:

   ^30Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give Pharaoh-hophra king of
   Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek
   his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 45

   The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah,
   when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in
   the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch;

   ^3Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the Lord hath added grief to my
   sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest.

   ^4Thus shalt thou say unto him, The Lord saith thus; Behold, that which
   I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will
   pluck up, even this whole land.

   ^5And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for,
   behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord: but thy life
   will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 46

   The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the
   Gentiles;

   ^2Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaoh-necho king of Egypt, which
   was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of
   Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
   Judah.

   ^3Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.

   ^4Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with
   your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.

   ^5Wherefore have I seen them dismayed and turned away back? and their
   mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not back: for
   fear was round about, saith the Lord.

   ^6Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they shall
   stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates.

   ^7Who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the
   rivers?

   ^8Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters are moved like the
   rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will cover the earth; I will
   destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.

   ^9Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men
   come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and
   the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.

   ^10For this is the day of the Lord GOD of hosts, a day of vengeance,
   that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shall devour,
   and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood: for the Lord
   GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river
   Euphrates.

   ^11Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt:
   in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured.

   ^12The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the
   land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, and they are
   fallen both together.

   ^13The word that the Lord spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.

   ^14Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph and
   in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee; for the sword shall
   devour round about thee.

   ^15Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not, because the Lord
   did drive them.

   ^16He made many to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said,
   Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our
   nativity, from the oppressing sword.

   ^17They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath
   passed the time appointed.

   ^18As I live, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts, Surely
   as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he
   come.

   ^19O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into
   captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an inhabitant.

   ^20Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but destruction cometh; it cometh
   out of the north.

   ^21Also her hired men are in the midst of her like fatted bullocks; for
   they also are turned back, and are fled away together: they did not
   stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, and the
   time of their visitation.

   ^22The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march with
   an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.

   ^23They shall cut down her forest, saith the Lord, though it cannot be
   searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and are
   innumerable.

   ^24The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be delivered
   into the hand of the people of the north.

   ^25The Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I will punish
   the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their
   kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him:

   ^26And I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their
   lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into
   the hand of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in
   the days of old, saith the Lord.

   ^27But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O
   Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from
   the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in rest and
   at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

   ^28Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the Lord: for I am with
   thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have
   driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee
   in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 47

   The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the
   Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.

   ^2Thus saith the Lord; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and
   shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all
   that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men
   shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.

   ^3At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at
   the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the
   fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;

   ^4Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, and to
   cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the Lord
   will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of Caphtor.

   ^5Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of
   their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?

   ^6O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put
   up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

   ^7How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against
   Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 48

   Against Moab thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto
   Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is
   confounded and dismayed.

   ^2There shall be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised
   evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a nation. Also
   thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.

   ^3A voice of crying shall be from Horonaim, spoiling and great
   destruction.

   ^4Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.

   ^5For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for in
   the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction.

   ^6Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.

   ^7For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou
   shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity with his
   priests and his princes together.

   ^8And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape:
   the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the
   Lord hath spoken.

   ^9Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the cities
   thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein.

   ^10Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed
   be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.

   ^11Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his
   lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he
   gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent
   is not changed.

   ^12Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will send
   unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his
   vessels, and break their bottles.

   ^13And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was
   ashamed of Bethel their confidence.

   ^14How say ye, We are mighty and strong men for the war?

   ^15Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young
   men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^16The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth
   fast.

   ^17All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his
   name, say, How is the strong staff broken, and the beautiful rod!

   ^18Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from thy glory, and
   sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, and he
   shall destroy thy strong holds.

   ^19O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that
   fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, What is done?

   ^20Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; and tell ye
   it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled,

   ^21And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon
   Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,

   ^22And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim,

   ^23And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon,

   ^24And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the
   land of Moab, far or near.

   ^25The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the Lord.

   ^26Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against the Lord: Moab
   also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.

   ^27For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves?
   for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.

   ^28O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock,
   and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the hole's
   mouth.

   ^29We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his
   loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his
   heart.

   ^30I know his wrath, saith the Lord; but it shall not be so; his lies
   shall not so effect it.

   ^31Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab;
   mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kir- heres.

   ^32O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer:
   thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of Jazer:
   the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.

   ^33And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from the
   land of Moab; and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses: none
   shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no shouting.

   ^34From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz, have
   they uttered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an heifer of
   three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.

   ^35Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the Lord, him that
   offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.

   ^36Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart
   shall sound like pipes for the men of Kir-heres: because the riches
   that he hath gotten are perished.

   ^37For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the
   hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.

   ^38There shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of Moab,
   and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel
   wherein is no pleasure, saith the Lord.

   ^39They shall howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned
   the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all
   them about him.

   ^40For thus saith the Lord; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall
   spread his wings over Moab.

   ^41Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty
   men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in
   her pangs.

   ^42And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath
   magnified himself against the Lord.

   ^43Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, O inhabitant
   of Moab, saith the Lord.

   ^44He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that
   getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring
   upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.

   ^45They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the
   force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the
   midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of
   the head of the tumultuous ones.

   ^46Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy
   sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.

   ^47Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days,
   saith the Lord. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 49

   Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the Lord; Hath Israel no sons?
   hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad, and his people
   dwell in his cities?

   ^2Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will cause
   an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites; and it shall be
   a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burned with fire: then
   shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, saith the Lord.

   ^3Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird
   you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for their
   king shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes together.

   ^4Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O
   backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall
   come unto me?

   ^5Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts,
   from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be driven out every man
   right forth; and none shall gather up him that wandereth.

   ^6And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of
   Ammon, saith the Lord.

   ^7Concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord of hosts; Is wisdom no more in
   Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished?

   ^8Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I will
   bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I will visit him.

   ^9If grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave some gleaning
   grapes? if thieves by night, they will destroy till they have enough.

   ^10But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and
   he shall not be able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his
   brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.

   ^11Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let
   thy widows trust in me.

   ^12For thus saith the Lord; Behold, they whose judgment was not to
   drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall
   altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt
   surely drink of it.

   ^13For I have sworn by myself, saith the Lord, that Bozrah shall become
   a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the cities
   thereof shall be perpetual wastes.

   ^14I have heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent unto
   the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come against her, and rise
   up to the battle.

   ^15For, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and despised
   among men.

   ^16Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O
   thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height
   of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle,
   I will bring thee down from thence, saith the Lord.

   ^17Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goeth by it shall be
   astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.

   ^18As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
   thereof, saith the Lord, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son
   of man dwell in it.

   ^19Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan
   against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run
   away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
   for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
   shepherd that will stand before me?

   ^20Therefore hear the counsel of the Lord, that he hath taken against
   Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the inhabitants
   of Teman: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he
   shall make their habitations desolate with them.

   ^21The earth is moved at the noise of their fall, at the cry the noise
   thereof was heard in the Red sea.

   ^22Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his wings
   over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom
   be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

   ^23Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they have
   heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is sorrow on the sea;
   it cannot be quiet.

   ^24Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear hath
   seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in
   travail.

   ^25How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy!

   ^26Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men
   of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^27And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall
   consume the palaces of Benhadad.

   ^28Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the Lord; Arise
   ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east.

   ^29Their tents and their flocks shall they take away: they shall take
   to themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels;
   and they shall cry unto them, Fear is on every side.

   ^30Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith
   the Lord; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against
   you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.

   ^31Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without
   care, saith the Lord, which have neither gates nor bars, which dwell
   alone.

   ^32And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle
   a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds them that are in the utmost
   corners; and I will bring their calamity from all sides thereof, saith
   the Lord.

   ^33And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, and a desolation for
   ever: there shall no man abide there, nor any son of man dwell in it.

   ^34The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam
   in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

   ^35Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will break the bow of Elam,
   the chief of their might.

   ^36And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of
   heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall
   be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come.

   ^37For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and
   before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them even
   my fierce anger, saith the Lord; and I will send the sword after them,
   till I have consumed them:

   ^38And I will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from thence the
   king and the princes, saith the Lord.

   ^39But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring
   again the captivity of Elam, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 50

   The word that the Lord spake against Babylon and against the land of
   the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.

   ^2Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard;
   publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded,
   Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are
   broken in pieces.

   ^3For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which
   shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall
   remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

   ^4In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the children of
   Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and
   weeping: they shall go, and seek the Lord their God.

   ^5They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying,
   Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant
   that shall not be forgotten.

   ^6My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to
   go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone
   from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.

   ^7All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said,
   We offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord, the
   habitation of justice, even the Lord, the hope of their fathers.

   ^8Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of
   the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks.

   ^9For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an
   assembly of great nations from the north country: and they shall set
   themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their
   arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.

   ^10And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied,
   saith the Lord.

   ^11Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine
   heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow
   as bulls;

   ^12Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be
   ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a
   dry land, and a desert.

   ^13Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but it
   shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be
   astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

   ^14Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that
   bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned
   against the Lord.

   ^15Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her
   foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is the
   vengeance of the Lord: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do
   unto her.

   ^16Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in
   the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn
   every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land.

   ^17Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away: first
   the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadrezzar
   king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

   ^18Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I
   will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the
   king of Assyria.

   ^19And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed
   on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount
   Ephraim and Gilead.

   ^20In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of
   Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of
   Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I
   reserve.

   ^21Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against
   the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, saith
   the Lord, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.

   ^22A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.

   ^23How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is
   Babylon become a desolation among the nations!

   ^24I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon,
   and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou
   hast striven against the Lord.

   ^25The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons
   of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord GOD of hosts in
   the land of the Chaldeans.

   ^26Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast
   her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be left.

   ^27Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe unto
   them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

   ^28The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon,
   to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord our God, the vengeance of
   his temple.

   ^29Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the bow,
   camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense her
   according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do unto
   her: for she hath been proud against the Lord, against the Holy One of
   Israel.

   ^30Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her men
   of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the Lord.

   ^31Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the Lord GOD of
   hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee.

   ^32And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him
   up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all
   round about him.

   ^33Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The children of Israel and the
   children of Judah were oppressed together: and all that took them
   captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.

   ^34Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of hosts is his name: he shall
   throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and
   disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

   ^35A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the Lord, and upon the
   inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

   ^36A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon her
   mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.

   ^37A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all
   the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall become
   as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed.

   ^38A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it is
   the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

   ^39Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of the
   islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and it
   shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from
   generation to generation.

   ^40As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
   thereof, saith the Lord; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any
   son of man dwell therein.

   ^41Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation, and
   many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

   ^42They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will not
   shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride
   upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle, against
   thee, O daughter of Babylon.

   ^43The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands
   waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in
   travail.

   ^44Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan
   unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run
   away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
   for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
   shepherd that will stand before me?

   ^45Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, that he hath taken
   against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the
   land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them
   out: surely he shall make their habitation desolate with them.

   ^46At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the
   cry is heard among the nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 51

   Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and
   against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a
   destroying wind;

   ^2And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall
   empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her
   round about.

   ^3Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him
   that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young
   men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

   ^4Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and they that
   are thrust through in her streets.

   ^5For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord
   of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of
   Israel.

   ^6Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be
   not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord'S
   vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

   ^7Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord'S hand, that made all the
   earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the
   nations are mad.

   ^8Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for
   her pain, if so she may be healed.

   ^9We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and
   let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reacheth
   unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

   ^10The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
   declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God.

   ^11Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the Lord hath raised up
   the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against
   Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the
   vengeance of his temple.

   ^12Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch
   strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the Lord hath
   both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of
   Babylon.

   ^13O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine
   end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.

   ^14The Lord of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill
   thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout
   against thee.

   ^15He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world
   by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding.

   ^16When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the
   heavens; and he causeth the vapors to ascend from the ends of the
   earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
   of his treasures.

   ^17Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is confounded
   by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no
   breath in them.

   ^18They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation
   they shall perish.

   ^19The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all
   things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the Lord of hosts is
   his name.

   ^20Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I
   break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;

   ^21And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and
   with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider;

   ^22With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee
   will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in
   pieces the young man and the maid;

   ^23I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock;
   and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of
   oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers.

   ^24And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea
   all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the
   Lord.

   ^25Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the Lord,
   which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon
   thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt
   mountain.

   ^26And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone
   for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the Lord.

   ^27Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the
   nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the
   kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against
   her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.

   ^28Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the
   captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his
   dominion.

   ^29And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the Lord
   shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a
   desolation without an inhabitant.

   ^30The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained
   in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they
   have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.

   ^31One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
   another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end,

   ^32And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burned
   with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

   ^33For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of
   Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh her: yet a
   little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

   ^34Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed
   me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a
   dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me
   out.

   ^35The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the
   inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea,
   shall Jerusalem say.

   ^36Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and
   take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her
   springs dry.

   ^37And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling place for dragons, an
   astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.

   ^38They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions'
   whelps.

   ^39In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them
   drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
   wake, saith the Lord.

   ^40I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with
   he goats.

   ^41How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth
   surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!

   ^42The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude
   of the waves thereof.

   ^43Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land
   wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass thereby.

   ^44And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his
   mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow
   together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.

   ^45My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man
   his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.

   ^46And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall be
   heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after that in
   another year shall come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler
   against ruler.

   ^47Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the
   graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded, and
   all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

   ^48Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing
   for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith
   the Lord.

   ^49As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon
   shall fall the slain of all the earth.

   ^50Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still: remember
   the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.

   ^51We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath
   covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the
   Lord'S house.

   ^52Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will do
   judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded
   shall groan.

   ^53Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should
   fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come
   unto her, saith the Lord.

   ^54A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from the
   land of the Chaldeans:

   ^55Because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the
   great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their
   voice is uttered:

   ^56Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her
   mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the Lord
   God of recompences shall surely requite.

   ^57And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her captains,
   and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual
   sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts.

   ^58Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be
   utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the
   people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shall
   be weary.

   ^59The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of
   Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of
   Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah
   was a quiet prince.

   ^60So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
   Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.

   ^61And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt
   see, and shalt read all these words;

   ^62Then shalt thou say, O Lord, thou hast spoken against this place, to
   cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but
   that it shall be desolate for ever.

   ^63And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book,
   that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of
   Euphrates:

   ^64And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from
   the evil that I will bring upon her: and they shall be weary. Thus far
   are the words of Jeremiah.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 52

   Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he
   reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal
   the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

   ^2And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord, according to
   all that Jehoiakim had done.

   ^3For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and
   Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah
   rebelled against the king of Babylon.

   ^4And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
   month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of
   Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched
   against it, and built forts against it round about.

   ^5So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

   ^6And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine
   was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the
   land.

   ^7Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and went
   forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two
   walls, which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldeans were by the
   city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.

   ^8But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook
   Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from
   him.

   ^9Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon
   to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him.

   ^10And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes:
   he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.

   ^11Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound
   him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till
   the day of his death.

   ^12Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the
   nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan,
   captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem,

   ^13And burned the house of the Lord, and the king's house; and all the
   houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the great men, burned he
   with fire:

   ^14And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the
   guard, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.

   ^15Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
   certain of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that
   remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king
   of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

   ^16But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the poor of
   the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.

   ^17Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and
   the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord, the
   Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.

   ^18The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls,
   and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered,
   took they away.

   ^19And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the caldrons,
   and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that which was of
   gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, took the captain
   of the guard away.

   ^20The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were under
   the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the Lord: the
   brass of all these vessels was without weight.

   ^21And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen
   cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness
   thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

   ^22And a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one chapiter
   was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round
   about, all of brass. The second pillar also and the pomegranates were
   like unto these.

   ^23And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and all the
   pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.

   ^24And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and
   Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:

   ^25He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the
   men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king's person,
   which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host, who
   mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of
   the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

   ^26So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them
   to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

   ^27And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah
   in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out of his
   own land.

   ^28This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the
   seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty:

   ^29In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive
   from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons:

   ^30In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzar- adan the
   captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred
   forty and five persons: all the persons were four thousand and six
   hundred.

   ^31And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity
   of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and
   twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the
   first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah,
   and brought him forth out of prison,

   ^32And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne of
   the kings that were with him in Babylon,

   ^33And changed his prison garments: and he did continually eat bread
   before him all the days of his life.

   ^34And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king
   of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the
   days of his life.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Lamentations

  of Jeremiah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people how is she
   become as a widow she that was great among the nations, and princess
   among the provinces, how is she become tributary

   ^2She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among
   all her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt
   treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

   ^3Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of
   great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest:
   all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.

   ^4The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts:
   all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are
   afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

   ^5Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the Lord hath
   afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her children are
   gone into captivity before the enemy.

   ^6And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes
   are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone without
   strength before the pursuer.

   ^7Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her
   miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when
   her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the
   adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

   ^8Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all that
   honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea,
   she sigheth, and turneth backward.

   ^9Her filthiness is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end;
   therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O Lord,
   behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified himself.

   ^10The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things:
   for she hath seen that the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom
   thou didst command that they should not enter into thy congregation.

   ^11All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their pleasant
   things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O Lord, and consider; for I
   am become vile.

   ^12Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there
   be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
   Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

   ^13From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth
   against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back:
   he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.

   ^14The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are
   wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall,
   the Lord hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to
   rise up.

   ^15The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of
   me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men: the
   Lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a winepress.

   ^16For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with water,
   because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me: my
   children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

   ^17Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:
   the Lord hath commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should
   be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

   ^18The Lord is righteous; for I have rebelled against his commandment:
   hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my virgins and my
   young men are gone into captivity.

   ^19I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine
   elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to
   relieve their souls.

   ^20Behold, O Lord; for I am in distress: my bowels are troubled; mine
   heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the
   sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

   ^21They have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: all mine
   enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast done it:
   thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall be like
   unto me.

   ^22Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as thou
   hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are many, and
   my heart is faint.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his
   anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel,
   and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!

   ^2The Lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not
   pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
   daughter of Judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath
   polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.

   ^3He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he hath
   drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned against
   Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.

   ^4He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand as
   an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye in the
   tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.

   ^5The Lord was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath
   swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and
   hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.

   ^6And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of a
   garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the Lord hath
   caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath
   despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

   ^7The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he
   hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces; they
   have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn
   feast.

   ^8The Lord hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion:
   he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from
   destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament; they
   languished together.

   ^9Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her
   bars: her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the law is no
   more; her prophets also find no vision from the Lord.

   ^10The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and keep
   silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded
   themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their
   heads to the ground.

   ^11Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is
   poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
   people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of
   the city.

   ^12They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned
   as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured
   out into their mothers' bosom.

   ^13What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I
   liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee,
   that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is
   great like the sea: who can heal thee?

   ^14Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee: and they
   have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but
   have seen for thee false burdens and causes of banishment.

   ^15All that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag their
   head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men
   call The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?

   ^16All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss
   and gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this
   is the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen it.

   ^17The Lord hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled his
   word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and
   hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee,
   he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.

   ^18Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, let
   tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest; let
   not the apple of thine eye cease.

   ^19Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour
   out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy
   hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for
   hunger in the top of every street.

   ^20Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall the
   women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the priest
   and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?

   ^21The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins
   and my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the
   day of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied.

   ^22Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that
   in the day of the Lord'S anger none escaped nor remained: those that I
   have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   I am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

   ^2He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

   ^3Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand against me all
   the day.

   ^4My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.

   ^5He hath builded against me, and compassed me with gall and travail.

   ^6He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.

   ^7He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my chain
   heavy.

   ^8Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.

   ^9He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths
   crooked.

   ^10He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret
   places.

   ^11He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath made
   me desolate.

   ^12He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

   ^13He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.

   ^14I was a derision to all my people; and their song all the day.

   ^15He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with
   wormwood.

   ^16He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered me
   with ashes.

   ^17And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat
   prosperity.

   ^18And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord:

   ^19Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
   gall.

   ^20My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

   ^21This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

   ^22It is of the Lord'S mercies that we are not consumed, because his
   compassions fail not.

   ^23They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.

   ^24The Lord is my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him.

   ^25The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
   seeketh him.

   ^26It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
   salvation of the Lord.

   ^27It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

   ^28He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon
   him.

   ^29He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.

   ^30He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full with
   reproach.

   ^31For the Lord will not cast off for ever:

   ^32But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to
   the multitude of his mercies.

   ^33For he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.

   ^34To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,

   ^35To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most High,

   ^36To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord approveth not.

   ^37Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord
   commandeth it not?

   ^38Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth not evil and good?

   ^39Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of
   his sins?

   ^40Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

   ^41Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

   ^42We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

   ^43Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain,
   thou hast not pitied.

   ^44Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should not
   pass through.

   ^45Thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the
   people.

   ^46All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

   ^47Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

   ^48Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of
   the daughter of my people.

   ^49Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission,

   ^50Till the Lord look down, and behold from heaven.

   ^51Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my
   city.

   ^52Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause.

   ^53They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

   ^54Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut off.

   ^55I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon.

   ^56Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my
   cry.

   ^57Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou saidst,
   Fear not.

   ^58O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed
   my life.

   ^59O Lord, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.

   ^60Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations
   against me.

   ^61Thou hast heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations
   against me;

   ^62The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against
   me all the day.

   ^63Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I am their musick.

   ^64Render unto them a recompence, O Lord, according to the work of
   their hands.

   ^65Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

   ^66Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the
   stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.

   ^2The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they
   esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!

   ^3Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their
   young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the
   ostriches in the wilderness.

   ^4The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for
   thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto them.

   ^5They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that
   were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.

   ^6For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is
   greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as
   in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

   ^7Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they
   were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of sapphire:

   ^8Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the
   streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is
   become like a stick.

   ^9They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain
   with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the
   fruits of the field.

   ^10The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children: they
   were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

   ^11The Lord hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce
   anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the
   foundations thereof.

   ^12The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would
   not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered
   into the gates of Jerusalem.

   ^13For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests,
   that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her,

   ^14They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
   themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

   ^15They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart,
   touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the
   heathen, They shall no more sojourn there.

   ^16The anger of the Lord hath divided them; he will no more regard
   them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not
   the elders.

   ^17As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching
   we have watched for a nation that could not save us.

   ^18They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is
   near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come.

   ^19Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they
   pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.

   ^20The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in
   their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the
   heathen.

   ^21Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land
   of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be
   drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.

   ^22The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of
   Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit
   thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy sins.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our
   reproach.

   ^2Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.

   ^3We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

   ^4We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.

   ^5Our necks are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest.

   ^6We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be
   satisfied with bread.

   ^7Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their
   iniquities.

   ^8Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us out
   of their hand.

   ^9We gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the sword of
   the wilderness.

   ^10Our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible famine.

   ^11They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of
   Judah.

   ^12Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not
   honoured.

   ^13They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the
   wood.

   ^14The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their
   musick.

   ^15The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning.

   ^16The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have sinned!

   ^17For this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes are dim.

   ^18Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk
   upon it.

   ^19Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to
   generation.

   ^20Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?

   ^21Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our
   days as of old.

   ^22But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of the Prophet

Ezekiel
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the
   fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river of
   Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

   ^2In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
   Jehoiachin's captivity,

   ^3The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son
   of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand
   of the Lord was there upon him.

   ^4And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great
   cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and
   out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of
   the fire.

   ^5Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
   creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a
   man.

   ^6And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.

   ^7And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
   like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of
   burnished brass.

   ^8And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
   sides; and they four had their faces and their wings.

   ^9Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they
   went; they went every one straight forward.

   ^10As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man,
   and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the face
   of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle.

   ^11Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two
   wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their
   bodies.

   ^12And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to
   go, they went; and they turned not when they went.

   ^13As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was
   like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went
   up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and
   out of the fire went forth lightning.

   ^14And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
   flash of lightning.

   ^15Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
   earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.

   ^16The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour
   of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance and
   their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel.

   ^17When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned not
   when they went.

   ^18As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and
   their rings were full of eyes round about them four.

   ^19And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and
   when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels
   were lifted up.

   ^20Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
   spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the
   spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

   ^21When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and
   when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up
   over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the
   wheels.

   ^22And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
   creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth
   over their heads above.

   ^23And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward
   the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one
   had two, which covered on that side, their bodies.

   ^24And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise
   of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as
   the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings.

   ^25And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads,
   when they stood, and had let down their wings.

   ^26And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness
   of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the
   likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
   above upon it.

   ^27And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round
   about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from
   the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the
   appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about.

   ^28As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
   rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the
   appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it,
   I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak
   unto thee.

   ^2And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon
   my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me.

   ^3And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of
   Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and
   their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.

   ^4For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto
   them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD.

   ^5And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for
   they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a
   prophet among them.

   ^6And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
   their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell
   among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their
   looks, though they be a rebellious house.

   ^7And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or
   whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious.

   ^8But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou
   rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I
   give thee.

   ^9And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll
   of a book was therein;

   ^10And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without:
   and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this
   roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel.

   ^2So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.

   ^3And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy
   bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was
   in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

   ^4And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of
   Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

   ^5For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard
   language, but to the house of Israel;

   ^6Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language, whose
   words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they
   would have hearkened unto thee.

   ^7But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not
   hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and
   hardhearted.

   ^8Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy
   forehead strong against their foreheads.

   ^9As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them
   not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious
   house.

   ^10Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall
   speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

   ^11And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy
   people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
   whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

   ^12Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great
   rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

   ^13I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that
   touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and
   a noise of a great rushing.

   ^14So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in
   bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the Lord was
   strong upon me.

   ^15Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by the
   river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there
   astonished among them seven days.

   ^16And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the
   Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^17Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
   therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.

   ^18When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest
   him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way,
   to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but
   his blood will I require at thine hand.

   ^19Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness,
   nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast
   delivered thy soul.

   ^20Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and
   commit iniquity, and I lay a stumblingblock before him, he shall die:
   because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and
   his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his
   blood will I require at thine hand.

   ^21Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin
   not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned;
   also thou hast delivered thy soul.

   ^22And the hand of the Lord was there upon me; and he said unto me,
   Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.

   ^23Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the glory
   of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of
   Chebar: and I fell on my face.

   ^24Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spake
   with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house.

   ^25But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and
   shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:

   ^26And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that
   thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are a
   rebellious house.

   ^27But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt
   say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that heareth, let him hear;
   and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious
   house.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and
   pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem:

   ^2And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a
   mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set battering rams
   against it round about.

   ^3Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of
   iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it
   shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be a
   sign to the house of Israel.

   ^4Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house
   of Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou shalt
   lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.

   ^5For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to
   the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt thou
   bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

   ^6And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side,
   and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I
   have appointed thee each day for a year.

   ^7Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and
   thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it.

   ^8And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee
   from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy siege.

   ^9Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles,
   and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make thee
   bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie
   upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.

   ^10And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels
   a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

   ^11Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin:
   from time to time shalt thou drink.

   ^12And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with
   dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.

   ^13And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their
   defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.

   ^14Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted:
   for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth
   of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh
   into my mouth.

   ^15Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's
   dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.

   ^16Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff
   of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and with
   care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment:

   ^17That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with
   another, and consume away for their iniquity.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a barber's
   razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then
   take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.

   ^2Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when
   the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third part,
   and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt scatter in
   the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.

   ^3Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy
   skirts.

   ^4Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire,
   and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into all
   the house of Israel.

   ^5Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the
   midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.

   ^6And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the
   nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about
   her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not
   walked in them.

   ^7Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye multiplied more than
   the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my
   statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according
   to the judgments of the nations that are round about you;

   ^8Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, am against
   thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of
   the nations.

   ^9And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I
   will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.

   ^10Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and
   the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee,
   and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.

   ^11Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD; Surely, because thou hast
   defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine
   abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine
   eye spare, neither will I have any pity.

   ^12A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine
   shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part shall
   fall by the sword round about thee and I will scatter a third part into
   all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.

   ^13Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to
   rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the
   Lord have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in
   them.

   ^14Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations
   that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.

   ^15So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an
   astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall
   execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes.
   I the Lord have spoken it.

   ^16When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which shall
   be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you: and I
   will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread:

   ^17So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall
   bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I
   will bring the sword upon thee. I the Lord have spoken it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy
   against them,

   ^3And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus
   saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers,
   and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and
   I will destroy your high places.

   ^4And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be broken:
   and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.

   ^5And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before
   their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.

   ^6In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the
   high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and
   made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images
   may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.

   ^7And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that
   I am the Lord.

   ^8Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape
   the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the
   countries.

   ^9And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations
   whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their
   whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which
   go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for the
   evils which they have committed in all their abominations.

   ^10And they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in
   vain that I would do this evil unto them.

   ^11Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy
   foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of
   Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the
   pestilence.

   ^12He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near
   shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall
   die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.

   ^13Then shall ye know that I am the Lord, when their slain men shall be
   among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in
   all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under
   every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to all
   their idols.

   ^14So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate,
   yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their
   habitations: and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of
   Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land.

   ^3Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee,
   and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon
   thee all thine abominations.

   ^4And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I
   will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in
   the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^5Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come.

   ^6An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it is
   come.

   ^7The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land: the
   time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of
   the mountains.

   ^8Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine
   anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will
   recompense thee for all thine abominations.

   ^9And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will
   recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are
   in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord that
   smiteth.

   ^10Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the
   rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

   ^11Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall
   remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs: neither shall
   there be wailing for them.

   ^12The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer rejoice,
   nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

   ^13For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they
   were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof,
   which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself in the
   iniquity of his life.

   ^14They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none goeth
   to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

   ^15The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within: he
   that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in the
   city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

   ^16But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the
   mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one
   for his iniquity.

   ^17All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.

   ^18They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall
   cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all
   their heads.

   ^19They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be
   removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them
   in the day of the wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their
   souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of
   their iniquity.

   ^20As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they
   made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things
   therein: therefore have I set it far from them.

   ^21And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and
   to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it.

   ^22My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my secret
   place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.

   ^23Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is
   full of violence.

   ^24Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall
   possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease;
   and their holy places shall be defiled.

   ^25Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be
   none.

   ^26Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour;
   then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law shall perish
   from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.

   ^27The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with
   desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled:
   I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts
   will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth
   day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat
   before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD fell there upon me.

   ^2Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the
   appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even
   upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber.

   ^3And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine
   head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and
   brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner
   gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of
   jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

   ^4And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to
   the vision that I saw in the plain.

   ^5Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way
   toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north,
   and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in
   the entry.

   ^6He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do?
   even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here,
   that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again,
   and thou shalt see greater abominations.

   ^7And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold
   a hole in the wall.

   ^8Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had
   digged in the wall, behold a door.

   ^9And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that
   they do here.

   ^10So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and
   abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed
   upon the wall round about.

   ^11And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house
   of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan,
   with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense
   went up.

   ^12Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients
   of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his
   imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken
   the earth.

   ^13He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see
   greater abominations that they do.

   ^14Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord'S house which
   was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz.

   ^15Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn thee
   yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these.

   ^16And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord'S house, and,
   behold, at the door of the temple of the Lord, between the porch and
   the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the
   temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the east; and they
   worshipped the sun toward the east.

   ^17Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a
   light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations
   which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence,
   and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch
   to their nose.

   ^18Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare,
   neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud
   voice, yet will I not hear them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that
   have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his
   destroying weapon in his hand.

   ^2And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which
   lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand;
   and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn
   by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.

   ^3And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub,
   whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he called to the
   man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side;

   ^4And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through
   the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men
   that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the
   midst thereof.

   ^5And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through
   the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity:

   ^6Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and
   women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my
   sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the
   house.

   ^7And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the
   slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.

   ^8And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left,
   that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou
   destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon
   Jerusalem?

   ^9Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah
   is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of
   perverseness: for they say, The Lord hath forsaken the earth, and the
   Lord seeth not.

   ^10And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
   pity, but I will recompense their way upon their head.

   ^11And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by
   his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast
   commanded me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the head of
   the cherubims there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as
   the appearance of the likeness of a throne.

   ^2And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in between
   the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of
   fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the city. And he
   went in in my sight.

   ^3Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the man
   went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.

   ^4Then the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub, and stood over
   the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud,
   and the court was full of the brightness of the Lord'S glory.

   ^5And the sound of the cherubims' wings was heard even to the outer
   court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh.

   ^6And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed with
   linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the
   cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels.

   ^7And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubims
   unto the fire that was between the cherubims, and took thereof, and put
   it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen: who took it, and
   went out.

   ^8And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man's hand under
   their wings.

   ^9And when I looked, behold the four wheels by the cherubims, one wheel
   by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: and the appearance
   of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone.

   ^10And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if a
   wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

   ^11When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as
   they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed it;
   they turned not as they went.

   ^12And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their
   wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels
   that they four had.

   ^13As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel.

   ^14And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a
   cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the
   face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

   ^15And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living creature that I
   saw by the river of Chebar.

   ^16And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when the
   cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same
   wheels also turned not from beside them.

   ^17When they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up, these
   lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature was in
   them.

   ^18Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the
   house, and stood over the cherubims.

   ^19And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the
   earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside
   them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the Lord'S
   house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

   ^20This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by
   the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims.

   ^21Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the
   likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.

   ^22And the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw by
   the river of Chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went every
   one straight forward.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of
   the Lord'S house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the door of the
   gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur,
   and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, the princes of the people.

   ^2Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise
   mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city:

   ^3Which say, It is not near; let us build houses: this city is the
   caldron, and we be the flesh.

   ^4Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.

   ^5And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak;
   Thus saith the Lord; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know
   the things that come into your mind, every one of them.

   ^6Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the
   streets thereof with the slain.

   ^7Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Your slain whom ye have laid in
   the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: but
   I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

   ^8Ye have feared the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you, saith
   the Lord GOD.

   ^9And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into
   the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.

   ^10Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you in the border of
   Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^11This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh
   in the midst thereof; but I will judge you in the border of Israel:

   ^12And ye shall know that I am the Lord: for ye have not walked in my
   statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the
   manners of the heathen that are round about you.

   ^13And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of
   Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud
   voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant
   of Israel?

   ^14Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^15Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred,
   and all the house of Israel wholly, are they unto whom the inhabitants
   of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the Lord: unto us is this land
   given in possession.

   ^16Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Although I have cast them
   far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the
   countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries
   where they shall come.

   ^17Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even gather you from
   the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been
   scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.

   ^18And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the
   detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence.

   ^19And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within
   you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
   them an heart of flesh:

   ^20That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do
   them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.

   ^21But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their
   detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way
   upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^22Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels beside
   them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

   ^23And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the city, and
   stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.

   ^24Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by the
   Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision
   that I had seen went up from me.

   ^25Then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the Lord
   had shewed me.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   The word of the Lord also came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which
   have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not:
   for they are a rebellious house.

   ^3Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and
   remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to
   another place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though they
   be a rebellious house.

   ^4Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff
   for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as they
   that go forth into captivity.

   ^5Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.

   ^6In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry it
   forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the
   ground: for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.

   ^7And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as
   stuff for captivity, and in the even I digged through the wall with
   mine hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my
   shoulder in their sight.

   ^8And in the morning came the word of the Lord unto me, saying,

   ^9Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said
   unto thee, What doest thou?

   ^10Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; This burden concerneth
   the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that are among
   them.

   ^11Say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done unto
   them: they shall remove and go into captivity.

   ^12And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in
   the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall to
   carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground
   with his eyes.

   ^13My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my
   snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans;
   yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.

   ^14And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to help
   him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.

   ^15And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall scatter them
   among the nations, and disperse them in the countries.

   ^16But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine,
   and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations
   among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know that I am the
   Lord.

   ^17Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

   ^18Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with
   trembling and with carefulness;

   ^19And say unto the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord GOD of the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel; They shall eat
   their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonishment,
   that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the
   violence of all them that dwell therein.

   ^20And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land
   shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^21And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^22Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel,
   saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?

   ^23Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will make this
   proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel;
   but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every
   vision.

   ^24For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination
   within the house of Israel.

   ^25For I am the Lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak
   shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O
   rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^26Again the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

   ^27Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that
   he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that
   are far off.

   ^28Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; There shall none
   of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken
   shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy,
   and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye
   the word of the Lord;

   ^3Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow
   their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

   ^4O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.

   ^5Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the
   house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord.

   ^6They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The Lord saith:
   and the Lord hath not sent them: and they have made others to hope that
   they would confirm the word.

   ^7Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying
   divination, whereas ye say, The Lord saith it; albeit I have not
   spoken?

   ^8Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have spoken vanity, and
   seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^9And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that
   divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither
   shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither
   shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am
   the Lord GOD.

   ^10Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace;
   and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed
   it with untempered morter:

   ^11Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall
   fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones,
   shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.

   ^12Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is
   the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?

   ^13Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even rend it with a stormy
   wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine
   anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it.

   ^14So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered
   morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof
   shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the
   midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^15Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that
   have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The wall
   is no more, neither they that daubed it;

   ^16To wit, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem,
   and which see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith
   the Lord GOD.

   ^17Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy
   people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou
   against them,

   ^18And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the women that sew pillows
   to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to
   hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the
   souls alive that come unto you?

   ^19And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and
   for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save
   the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that
   hear your lies?

   ^20Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against your
   pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I will
   tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls
   that ye hunt to make them fly.

   ^21Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your
   hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall
   know that I am the Lord.

   ^22Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom
   I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he
   should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:

   ^23Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I
   will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I am
   the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me.

   ^2And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^3Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put
   the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be
   enquired of at all by them?

   ^4Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord
   GOD; Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his
   heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face,
   and cometh to the prophet; I the Lord will answer him that cometh
   according to the multitude of his idols;

   ^5That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they
   are all estranged from me through their idols.

   ^6Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
   Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces
   from all your abominations.

   ^7For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that
   sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up
   his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity
   before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning
   me; I the Lord will answer him by myself:

   ^8And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and
   a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye
   shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^9And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the
   Lord have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon
   him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.

   ^10And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment
   of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto
   him;

   ^11That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be
   polluted any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be
   my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^12The word of the Lord came again to me, saying,

   ^13Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by trespassing
   grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break
   the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will
   cut off man and beast from it:

   ^14Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they
   should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^15If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they spoil
   it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because of the
   beasts:

   ^16Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD,
   they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be
   delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

   ^17Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the
   land; so that I cut off man and beast from it:

   ^18Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD,
   they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be
   delivered themselves.

   ^19Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury upon
   it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast:

   ^20Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live, saith the Lord
   GOD, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but
   deliver their own souls by their righteousness.

   ^21For thus saith the Lord GOD; How much more when I send my four sore
   judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome
   beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?

   ^22Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought
   forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth unto you,
   and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be comforted
   concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning
   all that I have brought upon it.

   ^23And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings:
   and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have
   done in it, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a
   branch which is among the trees of the forest?

   ^3Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of
   it to hang any vessel thereon?

   ^4Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both
   the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any work?

   ^5Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how much less
   shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and
   it is burned?

   ^6Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As the vine tree among the trees
   of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give
   the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

   ^7And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one fire,
   and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am the
   Lord, when I set my face against them.

   ^8And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a
   trespass, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 16

   Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,

   ^3And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy
   nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy
   mother an Hittite.

   ^4And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not
   cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast not
   salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

   ^5None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
   compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
   lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.

   ^6And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood,
   I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto
   thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

   ^7I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast
   increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments:
   thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast
   naked and bare.

   ^8Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was
   the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
   nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with
   thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest mine.

   ^9Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blood
   from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.

   ^10I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers'
   skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with
   silk.

   ^11I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy
   hands, and a chain on thy neck.

   ^12And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a
   beautiful crown upon thine head.

   ^13Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of
   fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine flour,
   and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst
   prosper into a kingdom.

   ^14And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it
   was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^15But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot
   because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one
   that passed by; his it was.

   ^16And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high places
   with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the like things
   shall not come, neither shall it be so.

   ^17Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver,
   which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst
   commit whoredom with them,

   ^18And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them: and thou
   hast set mine oil and mine incense before them.

   ^19My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey,
   wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet
   savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^20Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast
   borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured.
   Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter,

   ^21That thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them
   to pass through the fire for them?

   ^22And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not
   remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and
   wast polluted in thy blood.

   ^23And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee!
   saith the Lord GOD;)

   ^24That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made
   thee an high place in every street.

   ^25Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast
   made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every one
   that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.

   ^26Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy
   neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to
   provoke me to anger.

   ^27Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have
   diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of
   them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are
   ashamed of thy lewd way.

   ^28Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou
   wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet
   couldest not be satisfied.

   ^29Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan
   unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith.

   ^30How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord GOD, seeing thou doest all
   these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman;

   ^31In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way,
   and makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an
   harlot, in that thou scornest hire;

   ^32But as a wife that committeth adultery, which taketh strangers
   instead of her husband!

   ^33They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all thy
   lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for
   thy whoredom.

   ^34And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms,
   whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou
   givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art
   contrary.

   ^35Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the Lord:

   ^36Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and
   thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and
   with all the idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy
   children, which thou didst give unto them;

   ^37Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou hast
   taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast loved, with all them that
   thou hast hated; I will even gather them round about against thee, and
   will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy
   nakedness.

   ^38And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood
   are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

   ^39And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down
   thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places: they shall
   strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and
   leave thee naked and bare.

   ^40They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall
   stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.

   ^41And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments
   upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee to cease
   from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more.

   ^42So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall
   depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.

   ^43Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast
   fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will
   recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and thou shalt
   not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.

   ^44Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against
   thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.

   ^45Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her
   children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their
   husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your
   father an Amorite.

   ^46And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell
   at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right
   hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

   ^47Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their
   abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast
   corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

   ^48As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she
   nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.

   ^49Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of
   bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters,
   neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

   ^50And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me:
   therefore I took them away as I saw good.

   ^51Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast
   multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy
   sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.

   ^52Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for
   thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are
   more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy
   shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.

   ^53When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and
   her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then
   will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them:

   ^54That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in
   all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.

   ^55When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their
   former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their
   former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former
   estate.

   ^56For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of
   thy pride,

   ^57Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach
   of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the
   daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about.

   ^58Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the Lord.

   ^59For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou hast
   done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.

   ^60Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of
   thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.

   ^61Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt
   receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will give them
   unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.

   ^62And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that
   I am the Lord:

   ^63That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy
   mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for
   all that thou hast done, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 17

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of
   Israel;

   ^3And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great eagle with great wings,
   longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto
   Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:

   ^4He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land
   of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants.

   ^5He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful
   field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow tree.

   ^6And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose
   branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it
   became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.

   ^7There was also another great eagle with great wings and many
   feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and
   shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the
   furrows of her plantation.

   ^8It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might bring
   forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly
   vine.

   ^9Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Shall it prosper? shall he not
   pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it
   wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without
   great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof.

   ^10Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? shall it not utterly
   wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the furrows
   where it grew.

   ^11Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^12Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean?
   tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath
   taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him
   to Babylon;

   ^13And hath taken of the king's seed, and made a covenant with him, and
   hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty of the land:

   ^14That the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up,
   but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.

   ^15But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt,
   that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper?
   shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall he break the covenant,
   and be delivered?

   ^16As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely in the place where the king
   dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant
   he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.

   ^17Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make
   for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut
   off many persons:

   ^18Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he
   had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not
   escape.

   ^19Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely mine oath that
   he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I
   recompense upon his own head.

   ^20And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
   snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there
   for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.

   ^21And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword,
   and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye shall
   know that I the Lord have spoken it.

   ^22Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also take of the highest branch of
   the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of his
   young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and
   eminent:

   ^23In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it
   shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and
   under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the
   branches thereof shall they dwell.

   ^24And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have
   brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up
   the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have
   brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up
   the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have
   spoken and have done it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 18

   The word of the Lord came unto me again, saying,

   ^2What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel,
   saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth
   are set on edge?

   ^3As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall not have occasion any more to
   use this proverb in Israel.

   ^4Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the
   soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.

   ^5But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,

   ^6And hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his
   eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his
   neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman,

   ^7And hath not oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his
   pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the
   hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment;

   ^8He that hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any
   increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed
   true judgment between man and man,

   ^9Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal
   truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^10If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that
   doeth the like to any one of these things,

   ^11And that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the
   mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife,

   ^12Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath spoiled by violence, hath
   not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath
   committed abomination,

   ^13Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then
   live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall
   surely die; his blood shall be upon him.

   ^14Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all his father's sins which
   he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like,

   ^15That hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his
   eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his
   neighbour's wife,

   ^16Neither hath oppressed any, hath not withholden the pledge, neither
   hath spoiled by violence, but hath given his bread to the hungry, and
   hath covered the naked with a garment,

   ^17That hath taken off his hand from the poor, that hath not received
   usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath walked in my
   statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall
   surely live.

   ^18As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother
   by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo, even
   he shall die in his iniquity.

   ^19Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father?
   When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept
   all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.

   ^20The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the
   iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of
   the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
   wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

   ^21But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath
   committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
   right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

   ^22All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be
   mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall
   live.

   ^23Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the
   Lord GOD: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?

   ^24But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and
   committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that
   the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he hath
   done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed,
   and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.

   ^25Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of
   Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal?

   ^26When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and
   committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath
   done shall he die.

   ^27Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he
   hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save
   his soul alive.

   ^28Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions
   that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

   ^29Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal. O
   house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?

   ^30Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according
   to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and turn yourselves from all
   your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

   ^31Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
   transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will
   ye die, O house of Israel?

   ^32For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the
   Lord GOD: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 19

   Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,

   ^2And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions, she
   nourished her whelps among young lions.

   ^3And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it
   learned to catch the prey; it devoured men.

   ^4The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and they
   brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt.

   ^5Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she
   took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.

   ^6And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion, and
   learned to catch the prey, and devoured men.

   ^7And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their cities;
   and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the noise of his
   roaring.

   ^8Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces,
   and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit.

   ^9And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king of
   Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be
   heard upon the mountains of Israel.

   ^10Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters: she
   was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.

   ^11And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and
   her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in
   her height with the multitude of her branches.

   ^12But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and
   the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and
   withered; the fire consumed them.

   ^13And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty
   ground.

   ^14And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured
   her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule. This
   is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 20

   And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth
   day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire
   of the Lord, and sat before me.

   ^2Then came the word of the Lord unto me, saying,

   ^3Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus
   saith the Lord GOD; Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, saith the
   Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of by you.

   ^4Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to
   know the abominations of their fathers:

   ^5And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when I chose
   Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob,
   and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up
   mine hand unto them, saying, I am the Lord your God;

   ^6In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth
   of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing
   with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands:

   ^7Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his
   eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I am the Lord
   your God.

   ^8But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they did
   not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did
   they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury
   upon them to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land
   of Egypt.

   ^9But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted
   before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself
   known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.

   ^10Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and
   brought them into the wilderness.

   ^11And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which if
   a man do, he shall even live in them.

   ^12Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and
   them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them.

   ^13But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness: they
   walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which if a
   man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly
   polluted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the
   wilderness, to consume them.

   ^14But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted
   before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.

   ^15Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I
   would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with
   milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;

   ^16Because they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes,
   but polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.

   ^17Nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did
   I make an end of them in the wilderness.

   ^18But I said unto their children in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the
   statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile
   yourselves with their idols:

   ^19I am the Lord your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments,
   and do them;

   ^20And hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you,
   that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.

   ^21Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked not in
   my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do,
   he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I
   would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them
   in the wilderness.

   ^22Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name's sake,
   that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose
   sight I brought them forth.

   ^23I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would
   scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the
   countries;

   ^24Because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my
   statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their
   fathers' idols.

   ^25Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and
   judgments whereby they should not live;

   ^26And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass
   through the fire all that openeth the womb, that I might make them
   desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the Lord.

   ^27Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto
   them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed
   me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.

   ^28For when I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up
   mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill, and all
   the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there
   they presented the provocation of their offering: there also they made
   their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink offerings.

   ^29Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And
   the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day.

   ^30Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are
   ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom
   after their abominations?

   ^31For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through
   the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this
   day: and shall I be enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live,
   saith the Lord GOD, I will not be enquired of by you.

   ^32And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye
   say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to
   serve wood and stone.

   ^33As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand, and with a
   stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you:

   ^34And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of
   the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a
   stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.

   ^35And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there
   will I plead with you face to face.

   ^36Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of
   Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^37And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
   into the bond of the covenant:

   ^38And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that
   transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where
   they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel: and ye
   shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^39As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; Go ye, serve
   ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto
   me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your
   idols.

   ^40For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel,
   saith the Lord GOD, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in
   the land, serve me: there will I accept them, and there will I require
   your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all your
   holy things.

   ^41I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out from
   the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been
   scattered; and I will be sanctified in you before the heathen.

   ^42And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into
   the land of Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine
   hand to give it to your fathers.

   ^43And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein
   ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your own sight
   for all your evils that ye have committed.

   ^44And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you
   for my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to
   your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^45Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^46Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward
   the south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field;

   ^47And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the Lord; Thus
   saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall
   devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame
   shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall
   be burned therein.

   ^48And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it: it shall
   not be quenched.

   ^49Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! they say of me, Doth he not speak
   parables?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 21

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward
   the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel,

   ^3And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I am
   against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will
   cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

   ^4Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the
   wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against all
   flesh from the south to the north:

   ^5That all flesh may know that I the Lord have drawn forth my sword out
   of his sheath: it shall not return any more.

   ^6Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins; and
   with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

   ^7And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou?
   that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every
   heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall
   faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and
   shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^8Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^9Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord; Say, A sword, a
   sword is sharpened, and also furbished:

   ^10It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it
   may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my
   son, as every tree.

   ^11And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: this
   sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of
   the slayer.

   ^12Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it shall
   be upon all the princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the sword shall
   be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh.

   ^13Because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the rod?
   it shall be no more, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^14Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands
   together, and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the
   slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which entereth
   into their privy chambers.

   ^15I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that
   their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made
   bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.

   ^16Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the left,
   whithersoever thy face is set.

   ^17I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to
   rest: I the Lord have said it.

   ^18The word of the Lord came unto me again, saying,

   ^19Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the
   king of Babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land:
   and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city.

   ^20Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the Ammonites,
   and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced.

   ^21For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head
   of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he
   consulted with images, he looked in the liver.

   ^22At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint
   captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with
   shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a mount,
   and to build a fort.

   ^23And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight, to
   them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the
   iniquity, that they may be taken.

   ^24Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have made your
   iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered,
   so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, I say, that ye
   are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

   ^25And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when
   iniquity shall have an end,

   ^26Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove the diadem, and take off the crown:
   this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him that
   is high.

   ^27I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no more,
   until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.

   ^28And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD
   concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou,
   The sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is furbished, to
   consume because of the glittering:

   ^29Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto
   thee, to bring thee upon the necks of them that are slain, of the
   wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity shall have an end.

   ^30Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in the
   place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity.

   ^31And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against
   thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish
   men, and skilful to destroy.

   ^32Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst
   of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the Lord have
   spoken it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 22

   Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody
   city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.

   ^3Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD, The city sheddeth blood in
   the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against
   herself to defile herself.

   ^4Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast
   defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast
   caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years:
   therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking
   to all countries.

   ^5Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee,
   which art infamous and much vexed.

   ^6Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their power
   to shed blood.

   ^7In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of
   thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger: in thee have they
   vexed the fatherless and the widow.

   ^8Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my sabbaths.

   ^9In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they eat
   upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.

   ^10In thee have they discovered their fathers' nakedness: in thee have
   they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.

   ^11And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife; and
   another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thee
   hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.

   ^12In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken usury
   and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by
   extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^13Behold, therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain
   which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of
   thee.

   ^14Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days
   that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.

   ^15And I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the
   countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.

   ^16And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the
   heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.

   ^17And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^18Son of man, the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they are
   brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they
   are even the dross of silver.

   ^19Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye are all become dross,
   behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.

   ^20As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into
   the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will
   I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave you there,
   and melt you.

   ^21Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath,
   and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.

   ^22As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be
   melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the Lord have
   poured out my fury upon you.

   ^23And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^24Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed,
   nor rained upon in the day of indignation.

   ^25There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a
   roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have
   taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows
   in the midst thereof.

   ^26Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy
   things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
   neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean,
   and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.

   ^27Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey,
   to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.

   ^28And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing
   vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord GOD,
   when the Lord hath not spoken.

   ^29The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery,
   and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the
   stranger wrongfully.

   ^30And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge,
   and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy
   it: but I found none.

   ^31Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have
   consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I
   recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 23

   The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother:

   ^3And they committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed whoredoms in
   their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised
   the teats of their virginity.

   ^4And the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister:
   and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus were their
   names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah.

   ^5And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her
   lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbours,

   ^6Which were clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them
   desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.

   ^7Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them that were
   the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with all
   their idols she defiled herself.

   ^8Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt: for in her youth
   they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and
   poured their whoredom upon her.

   ^9Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the
   hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.

   ^10These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons and her
   daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among
   women; for they had executed judgment upon her.

   ^11And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in her
   inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in
   her whoredoms.

   ^12She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains and rulers
   clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them
   desirable young men.

   ^13Then I saw that she was defiled, that they took both one way,

   ^14And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men
   pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with
   vermilion,

   ^15Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon
   their heads, all of them princes to look to, after the manner of the
   Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity:

   ^16And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and
   sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.

   ^17And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they
   defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and
   her mind was alienated from them.

   ^18So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness: then
   my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from her
   sister.

   ^19Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the days
   of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.

   ^20For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of
   asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.

   ^21Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in
   bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth.

   ^22Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will raise
   up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I will
   bring them against thee on every side;

   ^23The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa,
   and all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men,
   captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon
   horses.

   ^24And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and wheels,
   and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee buckler
   and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment before them,
   and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.

   ^25And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal
   furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and
   thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy
   daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.

   ^26They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy
   fair jewels.

   ^27Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom
   brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift up thine
   eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more.

   ^28For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will deliver thee into the
   hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy mind
   is alienated:

   ^29And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy
   labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare: and the nakedness of thy
   whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.

   ^30I will do these things unto thee, because thou hast gone a whoring
   after the heathen, and because thou art polluted with their idols.

   ^31Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will I give her
   cup into thine hand.

   ^32Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup deep
   and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it
   containeth much.

   ^33Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of
   astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.

   ^34Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break the
   sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken it,
   saith the Lord GOD.

   ^35Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast forgotten me,
   and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and
   thy whoredoms.

   ^36The Lord said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah
   and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations;

   ^37That they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and
   with their idols have they committed adultery, and have also caused
   their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire,
   to devour them.

   ^38Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my sanctuary
   in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.

   ^39For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they
   came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have
   they done in the midst of mine house.

   ^40And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto
   whom a messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash
   thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments,

   ^41And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it,
   whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.

   ^42And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her: and with the
   men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the wilderness, which
   put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.

   ^43Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, Will they now
   commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?

   ^44Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth
   the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd
   women.

   ^45And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of
   adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because
   they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

   ^46For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will bring up a company upon them,
   and will give them to be removed and spoiled.

   ^47And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with
   their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn
   up their houses with fire.

   ^48Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women
   may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

   ^49And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear
   the sins of your idols: and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 24

   Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the
   month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this same day:
   the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.

   ^3And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them,
   Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water
   into it:

   ^4Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the thigh,
   and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

   ^5Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, and
   make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.

   ^6Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot
   whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it
   out piece by piece; let no lot fall up on it.

   ^7For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a
   rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust;

   ^8That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her
   blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

   ^9Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city! I will
   even make the pile for fire great.

   ^10Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well,
   and let the bones be burned.

   ^11Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may
   be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten in
   it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

   ^12She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not
   forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

   ^13In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou
   wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more,
   till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

   ^14I the Lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it;
   I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent;
   according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge
   thee, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^15Also the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^16Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes
   with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy
   tears run down.

   ^17Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of
   thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not
   thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

   ^18So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died;
   and I did in the morning as I was commanded.

   ^19And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these things
   are to us, that thou doest so?

   ^20Then I answered them, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^21Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
   will profane my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire
   of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your
   daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword.

   ^22And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips, nor
   eat the bread of men.

   ^23And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your
   feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your
   iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

   ^24Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done
   shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord
   GOD.

   ^25Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from
   them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes,
   and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their
   daughters,

   ^26That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee, to cause
   thee to hear it with thine ears?

   ^27In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and
   thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto
   them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 25

   The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against
   them;

   ^3And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith
   the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it
   was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and
   against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity;

   ^4Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a
   possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their
   dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy
   milk.

   ^5And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a
   couchingplace for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^6For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast clapped thine hands,
   and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite
   against the land of Israel;

   ^7Behold, therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will
   deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I will cut thee off from
   the people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries: I
   will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.

   ^8Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold,
   the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen;

   ^9Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from
   his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country,
   Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim,

   ^10Unto the men of the east with the Ammonites, and will give them in
   possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.

   ^11And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I
   am the Lord.

   ^12Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against the
   house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and
   revenged himself upon them;

   ^13Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also stretch out mine hand
   upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it; and I will make it
   desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.

   ^14And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people
   Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and according
   to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^15Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the Philistines have dealt by
   revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy
   it for the old hatred;

   ^16Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will stretch out mine
   hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and
   destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

   ^17And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes;
   and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall lay my vengeance
   upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 26

   And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
   month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she
   is broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I
   shall be replenished, now she is laid waste:

   ^3Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O
   Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea
   causeth his waves to come up.

   ^4And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers:
   I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a
   rock.

   ^5It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the
   sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD: and it shall become a
   spoil to the nations.

   ^6And her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the sword;
   and they shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^7For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus
   Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with
   horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
   people.

   ^8He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shall
   make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up
   the buckler against thee.

   ^9And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his axes
   he shall break down thy towers.

   ^10By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover
   thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the
   wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men
   enter into a city wherein is made a breach.

   ^11With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets: he
   shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong garrisons shall go
   down to the ground.

   ^12And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy
   merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy
   pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy
   dust in the midst of the water.

   ^13And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of
   thy harps shall be no more heard.

   ^14And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a place
   to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the Lord have
   spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^15Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at the
   sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in
   the midst of thee?

   ^16Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones,
   and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered garments: they
   shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit upon the ground,
   and shall tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee.

   ^17And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, How
   art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned
   city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which
   cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!

   ^18Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles
   that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.

   ^19For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall make thee a desolate city,
   like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep
   upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee;

   ^20When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit,
   with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the
   earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit,
   that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the
   living;

   ^21I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be
   sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 27

   The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^2Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus;

   ^3And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea,
   which art a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord
   GOD; O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty.

   ^4Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected
   thy beauty.

   ^5They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they have
   taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.

   ^6Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the
   Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles of
   Chittim.

   ^7Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou
   spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of
   Elishah was that which covered thee.

   ^8The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, O
   Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots.

   ^9The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy
   calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to
   occupy thy merchandise.

   ^10They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy men of
   war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy
   comeliness.

   ^11The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about,
   and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon
   thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.

   ^12Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of
   riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.

   ^13Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded the
   persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.

   ^14They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and
   horsemen and mules.

   ^15The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the merchandise
   of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of ivory and
   ebony.

   ^16Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of
   thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and
   broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.

   ^17Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they traded
   in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and
   balm.

   ^18Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy
   making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and
   white wool.

   ^19Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright
   iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.

   ^20Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.

   ^21Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in
   lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants.

   ^22The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants: they
   occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious
   stones, and gold.

   ^23Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and
   Chilmad, were thy merchants.

   ^24These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue clothes,
   and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords,
   and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

   ^25The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou wast
   replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.

   ^26Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath
   broken thee in the midst of the seas.

   ^27Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy
   pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy
   men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the
   midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy
   ruin.

   ^28The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.

   ^29And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the
   sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land;

   ^30And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry
   bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow
   themselves in the ashes:

   ^31And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them
   with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart
   and bitter wailing.

   ^32And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and
   lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed
   in the midst of the sea?

   ^33When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many
   people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of
   thy riches and of thy merchandise.

   ^34In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of
   the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee
   shall fall.

   ^35All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and
   their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their
   countenance.

   ^36The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a
   terror, and never shalt be any more.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 28

   The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
   Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit
   in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and
   not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God:

   ^3Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can
   hide from thee:

   ^4With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee
   riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures:

   ^5By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy
   riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches:

   ^6Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart
   as the heart of God;

   ^7Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of
   the nations: and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy
   wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.

   ^8They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths
   of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

   ^9Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but thou
   shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

   ^10Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of
   strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^11Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^12Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say
   unto him, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of
   wisdom, and perfect in beauty.

   ^13Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was
   thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx,
   and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold:
   the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in
   the day that thou wast created.

   ^14Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so:
   thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down
   in the midst of the stones of fire.

   ^15Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created,
   till iniquity was found in thee.

   ^16By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of
   thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as
   profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering
   cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

   ^17Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted
   thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to the ground,
   I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.

   ^18Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
   iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring
   forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will
   bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold
   thee.

   ^19All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at
   thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.

   ^20Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^21Son of man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it,

   ^22And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O
   Zidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall
   know that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgments in her,
   and shall be sanctified in her.

   ^23For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her street; and
   the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon her
   on every side; and they shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^24And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
   Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that
   despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

   ^25Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall have gathered the house of
   Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be
   sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
   in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob.

   ^26And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and
   plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have
   executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them;
   and they shall know that I am the Lord their God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 29

   In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month,
   the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy
   against him, and against all Egypt:

   ^3Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee,
   Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his
   rivers, which hath said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for
   myself.

   ^4But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy
   rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the
   midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto
   thy scales.

   ^5And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all the
   fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou shalt
   not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for meat to
   the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.

   ^6And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord,
   because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.

   ^7When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and rend
   all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and
   madest all their loins to be at a stand.

   ^8Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring a sword upon
   thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

   ^9And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall
   know that I am the Lord: because he hath said, The river is mine, and I
   have made it.

   ^10Behold, therefore I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and I
   will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the tower
   of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.

   ^11No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass
   through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.

   ^12And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the
   countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are
   laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the
   Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the
   countries.

   ^13Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end of forty years will I gather
   the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:

   ^14And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them
   to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation;
   and they shall be there a base kingdom.

   ^15It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt
   itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they
   shall no more rule over the nations.

   ^16And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, which
   bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look after
   them: but they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

   ^17And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first
   month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto
   me, saying,

   ^18Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve
   a great service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every
   shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for
   the service that he had served against it:

   ^19Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will give the land of
   Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her
   multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the
   wages for his army.

   ^20I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he
   served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^21In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud
   forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of
   them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 30

   The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Woe
   worth the day

   ^3For the day is near, even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day;
   it shall be the time of the heathen.

   ^4And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in
   Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away
   her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

   ^5Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub,
   and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the
   sword.

   ^6Thus saith the Lord; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and the
   pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall they
   fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^7And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
   desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are
   wasted.

   ^8And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have set a fire in
   Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

   ^9In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make the
   careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in
   the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

   ^10Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also make the multitude of Egypt to
   cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

   ^11He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be
   brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords against
   Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

   ^12And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand of
   the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by
   the hand of strangers: I the Lord have spoken it.

   ^13Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also destroy the idols, and I will
   cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a
   prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of
   Egypt.

   ^14And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and
   will execute judgments in No.

   ^15And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I will
   cut off the multitude of No.

   ^16And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No
   shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.

   ^17The young men of Aven and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword: and
   these cities shall go into captivity.

   ^18At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break
   there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in
   her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go
   into captivity.

   ^19Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that I
   am the Lord.

   ^20And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the
   seventh day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me,
   saying,

   ^21Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo,
   it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to
   make it strong to hold the sword.

   ^22Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against Pharaoh king
   of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was
   broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.

   ^23And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will
   disperse them through the countries.

   ^24And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my
   sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh's arms, and he shall groan
   before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.

   ^25But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms
   of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the Lord,
   when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he
   shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

   ^26And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse
   them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 31

   And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the
   first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude;
   Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

   ^3Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and
   with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among
   the thick boughs.

   ^4The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her
   rivers running round about his plants, and sent out her little rivers
   unto all the trees of the field.

   ^5Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field,
   and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of
   the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

   ^6All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his
   branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and
   under his shadow dwelt all great nations.

   ^7Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches: for
   his root was by great waters.

   ^8The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees
   were not like his boughs, and the chesnut trees were not like his
   branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his
   beauty.

   ^9I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that all
   the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him.

   ^10Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast lifted up
   thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs,
   and his heart is lifted up in his height;

   ^11I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of
   the heathen; he shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for
   his wickedness.

   ^12And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and
   have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches
   are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of the land;
   and all the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have
   left him.

   ^13Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all the
   beasts of the field shall be upon his branches:

   ^14To the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves
   for their height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs,
   neither their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for
   they are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in
   the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

   ^15Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when he went down to the grave I
   caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the
   floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I caused Lebanon
   to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.

   ^16I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast
   him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the trees
   of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be
   comforted in the nether parts of the earth.

   ^17They also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain with
   the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in
   the midst of the heathen.

   ^18To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees
   of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the
   nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the
   uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and
   all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 32

   And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the
   first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say
   unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a
   whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and
   troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.

   ^3Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will therefore spread out my net over thee
   with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my net.

   ^4Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon the
   open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain upon
   thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.

   ^5And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
   with thy height.

   ^6I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even
   to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.

   ^7And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the
   stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon
   shall not give her light.

   ^8All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and set
   darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^9I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy
   destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not
   known.

   ^10Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings shall
   be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before
   them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his own
   life, in the day of thy fall.

   ^11For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword of the king of Babylon shall
   come upon thee.

   ^12By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, the
   terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the pomp of
   Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

   ^13I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great
   waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the
   hoofs of beasts trouble them.

   ^14Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to run
   like oil, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^15When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country shall
   be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them
   that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the Lord.

   ^16This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the
   daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her,
   even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^17It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of
   the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^18Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down,
   even her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether
   parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit.

   ^19Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with the
   uncircumcised.

   ^20They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword:
   she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.

   ^21The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of
   hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie
   uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

   ^22Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him: all
   of them slain, fallen by the sword:

   ^23Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is
   round about her grave: all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which
   caused terror in the land of the living.

   ^24There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of
   them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into
   the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the land of
   the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to
   the pit.

   ^25They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
   multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised,
   slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the
   living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the
   pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.

   ^26There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are round
   about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they
   caused their terror in the land of the living.

   ^27And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the
   uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war:
   and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities
   shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of the mighty in
   the land of the living.

   ^28Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and
   shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.

   ^29There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their
   might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie
   with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

   ^30There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the
   Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they
   are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that
   be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to
   the pit.

   ^31Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his
   multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^32For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he shall
   be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain with
   the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 33

   Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them,
   When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a
   man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:

   ^3If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet,
   and warn the people;

   ^4Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not
   warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon
   his own head.

   ^5He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood
   shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul.

   ^6But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and
   the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from
   among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I
   require at the watchman's hand.

   ^7So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of
   Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them
   from me.

   ^8When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if
   thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man
   shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

   ^9Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if
   he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
   hast delivered thy soul.

   ^10Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus
   ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we
   pine away in them, how should we then live?

   ^11Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in
   the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and
   live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
   house of Israel?

   ^12Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The
   righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his
   transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall
   thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall
   the righteous be able to live for his righteousness in the day that he
   sinneth.

   ^13When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if he
   trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
   righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he
   hath committed, he shall die for it.

   ^14Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn
   from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;

   ^15If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed,
   walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall
   surely live, he shall not die.

   ^16None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him:
   he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.

   ^17Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not
   equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

   ^18When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth
   iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

   ^19But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is
   lawful and right, he shall live thereby.

   ^20Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel,
   I will judge you every one after his ways.

   ^21And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the
   tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped
   out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten.

   ^22Now the hand of the Lord was upon me in the evening, afore he that
   was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the
   morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.

   ^23Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^24Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel
   speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are
   many; the land is given us for inheritance.

   ^25Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Ye eat with the
   blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: and
   shall ye possess the land?

   ^26Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every
   one his neighbour's wife: and shall ye possess the land?

   ^27Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely
   they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in
   the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that
   be in the forts and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.

   ^28For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength
   shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that none
   shall pass through.

   ^29Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the land
   most desolate because of all their abominations which they have
   committed.

   ^30Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking
   against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one
   to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and
   hear what is the word that cometh forth from the Lord.

   ^31And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before
   thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them:
   for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after
   their covetousness.

   ^32And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a
   pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy
   words, but they do them not.

   ^33And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they
   know that a prophet hath been among them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 34

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and
   say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the shepherds; Woe be to
   the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the
   shepherds feed the flocks?

   ^3Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that
   are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

   ^4The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
   which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither
   have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye
   sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye
   ruled them.

   ^5And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they
   became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

   ^6My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high
   hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and
   none did search or seek after them.

   ^7Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;

   ^8As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely because my flock became a prey,
   and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was
   no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the
   shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock;

   ^9Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;

   ^10Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I
   will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from
   feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any
   more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not
   be meat for them.

   ^11For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, will both search my
   sheep, and seek them out.

   ^12As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his
   sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver
   them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and
   dark day.

   ^13And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the
   countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon
   the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places
   of the country.

   ^14I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of
   Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in
   a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

   ^15I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^16I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
   driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
   strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the
   strong; I will feed them with judgment.

   ^17And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I judge
   between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.

   ^18Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture,
   but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and
   to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with
   your feet?

   ^19And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your
   feet; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.

   ^20Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them; Behold, I, even I, will
   judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

   ^21Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all
   the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;

   ^22Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey;
   and I will judge between cattle and cattle.

   ^23And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them,
   even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
   shepherd.

   ^24And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince
   among them; I the Lord have spoken it.

   ^25And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the
   evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in
   the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

   ^26And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing;
   and I will cause the shower to come down in his season; there shall be
   showers of blessing.

   ^27And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall
   yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and shall
   know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the bands of their yoke,
   and delivered them out of the hand of those that served themselves of
   them.

   ^28And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the
   beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none
   shall make them afraid.

   ^29And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall be no
   more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the
   heathen any more.

   ^30Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and
   that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^31And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your
   God, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 35

   Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it,

   ^3And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am
   against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will
   make thee most desolate.

   ^4I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou
   shalt know that I am the Lord.

   ^5Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood of
   the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their
   calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end:

   ^6Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto
   blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood,
   even blood shall pursue thee.

   ^7Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him
   that passeth out and him that returneth.

   ^8And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills, and
   in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain
   with the sword.

   ^9I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not
   return: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^10Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two countries
   shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the Lord was there:

   ^11Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will even do according
   to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast used out of
   thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known among them, when
   I have judged thee.

   ^12And thou shalt know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all
   thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel,
   saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

   ^13Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied
   your words against me: I have heard them.

   ^14Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make
   thee desolate.

   ^15As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel,
   because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be
   desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall
   know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 36

   Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say,
   Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord:

   ^2Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the enemy hath said against you,
   Aha, even the ancient high places are ours in possession:

   ^3Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they
   have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye
   might be a possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken
   up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people:

   ^4Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD;
   Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
   rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities
   that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to the residue of
   the heathen that are round about;

   ^5Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the fire of my jealousy
   have I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against all
   Idumea, which have appointed my land into their possession with the joy
   of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey.

   ^6Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the
   mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus
   saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my
   fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen:

   ^7Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely
   the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

   ^8But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches,
   and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to
   come.

   ^9For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be
   tilled and sown:

   ^10And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all
   of it: and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be
   builded:

   ^11And I will multiply upon you man and beast; and they shall increase
   and bring fruit: and I will settle you after your old estates, and will
   do better unto you than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am
   the Lord.

   ^12Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel; and
   they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou
   shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.

   ^13Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land
   devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations;

   ^14Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations
   any more, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^15Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen
   any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more,
   neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith the Lord
   GOD.

   ^16Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^17Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they
   defiled it by their own way and by their doings: their way was before
   me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.

   ^18Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had
   shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it:

   ^19And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed
   through the countries: according to their way and according to their
   doings I judged them.

   ^20And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they
   profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of
   the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land.

   ^21But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had
   profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

   ^22Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I
   do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's
   sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.

   ^23And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the
   heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen
   shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord GOD, when I shall be
   sanctified in you before their eyes.

   ^24For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of
   all countries, and will bring you into your own land.

   ^25Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
   from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.

   ^26A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
   you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
   give you an heart of flesh.

   ^27And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
   statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

   ^28And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye
   shall be my people, and I will be your God.

   ^29I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will call
   for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

   ^30And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the
   field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the
   heathen.

   ^31Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were
   not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your
   iniquities and for your abominations.

   ^32Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known unto
   you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.

   ^33Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day that I shall have cleansed you
   from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the cities,
   and the wastes shall be builded.

   ^34And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in
   the sight of all that passed by.

   ^35And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the
   garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become
   fenced, and are inhabited.

   ^36Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I the
   Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I the
   Lord have spoken it, and I will do it.

   ^37Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will yet for this be enquired of by the
   house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men like
   a flock.

   ^38As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts;
   so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and they shall
   know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 37

   The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of
   the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full of
   bones,

   ^2And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were
   very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.

   ^3And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I
   answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest.

   ^4Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them,
   O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.

   ^5Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath
   to enter into you, and ye shall live:

   ^6And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and
   cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye
   shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^7So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a
   noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his
   bone.

   ^8And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them,
   and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them.

   ^9Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man,
   and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come from the four winds,
   O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

   ^10So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them,
   and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

   ^11Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of
   Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we
   are cut off for our parts.

   ^12Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
   Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up
   out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

   ^13And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your
   graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves,

   ^14And shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place
   you in your own land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken
   it, and performed it, saith the Lord.

   ^15The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

   ^16Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it,
   For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take
   another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and
   for all the house of Israel his companions:

   ^17And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become
   one in thine hand.

   ^18And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying,
   Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?

   ^19Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the
   stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of
   Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of
   Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

   ^20And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before
   their eyes.

   ^21And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the
   children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and
   will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land:

   ^22And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of
   Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no
   more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any
   more at all:

   ^23Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor
   with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but
   I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces, wherein they have
   sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will
   be their God.

   ^24And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
   have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my
   statutes, and do them.

   ^25And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my
   servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein,
   even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever:
   and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

   ^26Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an
   everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply
   them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

   ^27My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and
   they shall be my people.

   ^28And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when
   my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 38

   And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^2Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief
   prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,

   ^3And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold I am against thee, O Gog,
   the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

   ^4And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will
   bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them
   clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company with bucklers
   and shields, all of them handling swords:

   ^5Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and
   helmet:

   ^6Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north
   quarters, and all his bands: and many people with thee.

   ^7Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company
   that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.

   ^8After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt
   come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered
   out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been
   always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they
   shall dwell safely all of them.

   ^9Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud
   to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee.

   ^10Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shall also come to pass, that at the
   same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil
   thought:

   ^11And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I
   will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them
   dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,

   ^12To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the
   desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are
   gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, that
   dwell in the midst of the land.

   ^13Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young
   lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? hast
   thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away silver and
   gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?

   ^14Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the
   Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt
   thou not know it?

   ^15And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and
   many people with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company,
   and a mighty army:

   ^16And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to
   cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee
   against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be
   sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.

   ^17Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old
   time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those
   days many years that I would bring thee against them?

   ^18And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come
   against the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that my fury shall come
   up in my face.

   ^19For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely
   in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel;

   ^20So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the
   beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth,
   and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my
   presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places
   shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.

   ^21And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains,
   saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shall be against his brother.

   ^22And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I
   will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that
   are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and
   brimstone.

   ^23Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known
   in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 39

   Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith
   the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of
   Meshech and Tubal:

   ^2And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and
   will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee
   upon the mountains of Israel:

   ^3And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine
   arrows to fall out of thy right hand.

   ^4Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy
   bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the
   ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be
   devoured.

   ^5Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith the
   Lord GOD.

   ^6And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly
   in the isles: and they shall know that I am the Lord.

   ^7So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel;
   and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen
   shall know that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel.

   ^8Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord GOD; this is the
   day whereof I have spoken.

   ^9And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall
   set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers,
   the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they
   shall burn them with fire seven years:

   ^10So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down
   any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and
   they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed
   them, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^11And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a
   place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the
   east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and
   there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call it
   The valley of Hamon-gog.

   ^12And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that
   they may cleanse the land.

   ^13Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be to
   them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^14And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing
   through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the
   face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall
   they search.

   ^15And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a
   man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have
   buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.

   ^16And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they
   cleanse the land.

   ^17And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; Speak unto every
   feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves,
   and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do
   sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel,
   that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

   ^18Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
   princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all
   of them fatlings of Bashan.

   ^19And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be
   drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.

   ^20Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with
   mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^21And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall
   see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon
   them.

   ^22So the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God from
   that day and forward.

   ^23And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into
   captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me,
   therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their
   enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

   ^24According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions
   have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.

   ^25Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now will I bring again the
   captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and
   will be jealous for my holy name;

   ^26After that they have borne their shame, and all their trespasses
   whereby they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in
   their land, and none made them afraid.

   ^27When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them
   out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of
   many nations;

   ^28Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, which caused them
   to be led into captivity among the heathen: but I have gathered them
   unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there.

   ^29Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured
   out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 40

   In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of
   the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after
   that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the Lord was
   upon me, and brought me thither.

   ^2In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set
   me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city on
   the south.

   ^3And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose
   appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his
   hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.

   ^4And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
   hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew
   thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou
   brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.

   ^5And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the
   man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the cubit and an hand
   breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed; and the
   height, one reed.

   ^6Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and went up
   the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, which was
   one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which was one reed
   broad.

   ^7And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad; and
   between the little chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the
   gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.

   ^8He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.

   ^9Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts
   thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.

   ^10And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this
   side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the
   posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

   ^11And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits;
   and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.

   ^12The space also before the little chambers was one cubit on this
   side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the little chambers
   were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

   ^13He measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber to the
   roof of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, door against
   door.

   ^14He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of the
   court round about the gate.

   ^15And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of the
   porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.

   ^16And there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to their
   posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches: and
   windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm trees.

   ^17Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were
   chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty
   chambers were upon the pavement.

   ^18And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the length of
   the gates was the lower pavement.

   ^19Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate
   unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits
   eastward and northward.

   ^20And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north, he
   measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.

   ^21And the little chambers thereof were three on this side and three on
   that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the
   measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the
   breadth five and twenty cubits.

   ^22And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were
   after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they
   went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before
   them.

   ^23And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward the
   north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an
   hundred cubits.

   ^24After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate toward
   the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches thereof
   according to these measures.

   ^25And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about,
   like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five
   and twenty cubits.

   ^26And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof
   were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and another
   on that side, upon the posts thereof.

   ^27And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he
   measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits.

   ^28And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he
   measured the south gate according to these measures;

   ^29And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the
   arches thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in
   it and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and
   five and twenty cubits broad.

   ^30And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and
   five cubits broad.

   ^31And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees
   were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight steps.

   ^32And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he
   measured the gate according to these measures.

   ^33And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the
   arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were
   windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty
   cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

   ^34And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm trees
   were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the
   going up to it had eight steps.

   ^35And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according to
   these measures;

   ^36The little chambers thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches
   thereof, and the windows to it round about: the length was fifty
   cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

   ^37And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees
   were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the
   going up to it had eight steps.

   ^38And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of the
   gates, where they washed the burnt offering.

   ^39And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two
   tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the sin
   offering and the trespass offering.

   ^40And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the north
   gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the porch of
   the gate, were two tables.

   ^41Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the
   side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their sacrifices.

   ^42And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering, of a
   cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one cubit
   high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the
   burnt offering and the sacrifice.

   ^43And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and upon
   the tables was the flesh of the offering.

   ^44And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in the
   inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their
   prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having
   the prospect toward the north.

   ^45And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the
   south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.

   ^46And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
   priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of
   Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the Lord to minister
   unto him.

   ^47So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred
   cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house.

   ^48And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post
   of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side:
   and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three
   cubits on that side.

   ^49The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven
   cubits; and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to it: and
   there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that
   side.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 41

   Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six
   cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side,
   which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

   ^2And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the door
   were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side:
   and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the breadth,
   twenty cubits.

   ^3Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two cubits;
   and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven cubits.

   ^4So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the breadth,
   twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This is the most
   holy place.

   ^5After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth
   of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every
   side.

   ^6And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in
   order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the
   side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not
   hold in the wall of the house.

   ^7And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the
   side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still upward
   round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was still
   upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the
   midst.

   ^8I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations of
   the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.

   ^9The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber without,
   was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the side
   chambers that were within.

   ^10And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round
   about the house on every side.

   ^11And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that was
   left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south: and
   the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.

   ^12Now the building that was before the separate place at the end
   toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building
   was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety
   cubits.

   ^13So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the separate
   place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred cubits
   long;

   ^14Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place
   toward the east, an hundred cubits.

   ^15And he measured the length of the building over against the separate
   place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the one side
   and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner temple, and
   the porches of the court;

   ^16The door posts, and the narrow windows, and the galleries round
   about on their three stories, over against the door, cieled with wood
   round about, and from the ground up to the windows, and the windows
   were covered;

   ^17To that above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and
   by all the wall round about within and without, by measure.

   ^18And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm tree
   was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two faces;

   ^19So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the one side,
   and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side: it
   was made through all the house round about.

   ^20From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm trees
   made, and on the wall of the temple.

   ^21The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the sanctuary;
   the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.

   ^22The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof two
   cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls
   thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table that is
   before the Lord.

   ^23And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.

   ^24And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two leaves
   for the one door, and two leaves for the other door.

   ^25And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubims
   and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there were thick
   planks upon the face of the porch without.

   ^26And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and on
   the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side chambers
   of the house, and thick planks.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 42

   Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
   north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the
   separate place, and which was before the building toward the north.

   ^2Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and the
   breadth was fifty cubits.

   ^3Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court, and
   over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was gallery
   against gallery in three stories.

   ^4And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits breadth inward, a
   way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.

   ^5Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were higher
   than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the building.

   ^6For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the pillars of
   the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than the lowest
   and the middlemost from the ground.

   ^7And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward the
   utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof was
   fifty cubits.

   ^8For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was fifty
   cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits.

   ^9And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as one
   goeth into them from the utter court.

   ^10The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court toward
   the east, over against the separate place, and over against the
   building.

   ^11And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers
   which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they: and
   all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and
   according to their doors.

   ^12And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the
   south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before
   the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.

   ^13Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers,
   which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the
   priests that approach unto the Lord shall eat the most holy things:
   there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and
   the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.

   ^14When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the
   holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
   garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on
   other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the
   people.

   ^15Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought
   me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east, and
   measured it round about.

   ^16He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred
   reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

   ^17He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring
   reed round about.

   ^18He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring
   reed.

   ^19He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds
   with the measuring reed.

   ^20He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about, five
   hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation
   between the sanctuary and the profane place.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 43

   Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward
   the east:

   ^2And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the
   east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth
   shined with his glory.

   ^3And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw,
   even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the
   city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river
   Chebar; and I fell upon my face.

   ^4And the glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the gate
   whose prospect is toward the east.

   ^5So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and,
   behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house.

   ^6And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man stood
   by me.

   ^7And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the
   place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
   children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of
   Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their
   whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places.

   ^8In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post
   by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even defiled
   my holy name by their abominations that they have committed: wherefore
   I have consumed them in mine anger.

   ^9Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their
   kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.

   ^10Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they
   may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the pattern.

   ^11And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the
   form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof,
   and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
   ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws
   thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form
   thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.

   ^12This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole
   limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law
   of the house.

   ^13And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The cubit
   is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a cubit, and
   the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round
   about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher place of the altar.

   ^14And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle shall
   be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle
   even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the breadth one
   cubit.

   ^15So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
   shall be four horns.

   ^16And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square in
   the four squares thereof.

   ^17And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad in
   the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
   cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs
   shall look toward the east.

   ^18And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These are
   the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
   offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

   ^19And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the seed
   of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the Lord
   GOD, a young bullock for a sin offering.

   ^20And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
   horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border
   round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.

   ^21Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he shall
   burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary.

   ^22And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats without
   blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they
   did cleanse it with the bullock.

   ^23When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a young
   bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.

   ^24And thou shalt offer them before the Lord, and the priests shall
   cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering
   unto the Lord.

   ^25Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin offering:
   they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock,
   without blemish.

   ^26Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they shall
   consecrate themselves.

   ^27And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the eighth
   day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon
   the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept you, saith the
   Lord GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 44

   Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary
   which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.

   ^2Then said the Lord unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be
   opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the Lord, the God of
   Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

   ^3It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
   before the Lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
   and shall go out by the way of the same.

   ^4Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I
   looked, and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the
   Lord: and I fell upon my face.

   ^5And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with
   thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee
   concerning all the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all the
   laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every
   going forth of the sanctuary.

   ^6And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel,
   Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of
   all your abominations,

   ^7In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in
   heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute
   it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and
   they have broken my covenant because of all your abominations.

   ^8And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have set
   keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor
   uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger
   that is among the children of Israel.

   ^10And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went
   astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall
   even bear their iniquity.

   ^11Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at the
   gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay the
   burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand
   before them to minister unto them.

   ^12Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the
   house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up mine
   hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their
   iniquity.

   ^13And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a priest
   unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most holy
   place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which
   they have committed.

   ^14But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the
   service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

   ^15But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge
   of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they
   shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before
   me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord GOD:

   ^16They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my
   table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

   ^17And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of
   the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool
   shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner
   court, and within.

   ^18They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen
   breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any
   thing that causeth sweat.

   ^19And when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter
   court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they
   ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on
   other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their
   garments.

   ^20Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow
   long; they shall only poll their heads.

   ^21Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner
   court.

   ^22Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put
   away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel,
   or a widow that had a priest before.

   ^23And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and
   profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.

   ^24And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall
   judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my
   statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

   ^25And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for
   father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for
   sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.

   ^26And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

   ^27And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner
   court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering,
   saith the Lord GOD.

   ^28And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their
   inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am their
   possession.

   ^29They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the
   trespass offering; and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs.

   ^30And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every
   oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the
   priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough,
   that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.

   ^31The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself, or
   torn, whether it be fowl or beast.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 45

   Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye
   shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the land: the
   length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and the
   breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the borders
   thereof round about.

   ^2Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length, with
   five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits round
   about for the suburbs thereof.

   ^3And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty
   thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the
   sanctuary and the most holy place.

   ^4The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the ministers
   of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the Lord: and
   it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for the
   sanctuary.

   ^5And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of
   breadth, shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for
   themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.

   ^6And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad,
   and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of the
   holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of Israel.

   ^7And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the
   other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession
   of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the
   possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east
   side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the
   portions, from the west border unto the east border.

   ^8In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes shall
   no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they give to
   the house of Israel according to their tribes.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel:
   remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away
   your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^10Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath. I

   ^11The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may
   contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an
   homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.

   ^12And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and
   twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.

   ^13This is the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an ephah
   of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of
   an homer of barley:

   ^14Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the
   tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths;
   for ten baths are an homer:

   ^15And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat
   pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and
   for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord
   GOD.

   ^16All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the prince
   in Israel.

   ^17And it shall be the prince's part to give burnt offerings, and meat
   offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons,
   and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel: he
   shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the burnt
   offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for the house
   of Israel.

   ^18Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first month, in the first day of the
   month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and cleanse the
   sanctuary:

   ^19And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put
   it upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle
   of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.

   ^20And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one that
   erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the house.

   ^21In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall
   have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be
   eaten.

   ^22And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all
   the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.

   ^23And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to the
   Lord, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven
   days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.

   ^24And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock, and
   an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

   ^25In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do
   the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin offering,
   according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat offering,
   and according to the oil.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 46

   Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the inner court that looketh
   toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath
   it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

   ^2And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
   without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall
   prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall
   worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the
   gate shall not be shut until the evening.

   ^3Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this
   gate before the Lord in the sabbaths and in the new moons.

   ^4And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the Lord in
   the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram without
   blemish.

   ^5And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat
   offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil
   to an ephah.

   ^6And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without
   blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without blemish.

   ^7And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an
   ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain
   unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

   ^8And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the
   porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.

   ^9But when the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the
   solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to
   worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth
   by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north
   gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in,
   but shall go forth over against it.

   ^10And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go in;
   and when they go forth, shall go forth.

   ^11And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall be
   an ephah to a bullock, and ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is
   able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

   ^12Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or
   peace offerings voluntarily unto the Lord, one shall then open him the
   gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt
   offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he
   shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

   ^13Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the Lord of a lamb of
   the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning.

   ^14And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the
   sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper
   with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual
   ordinance unto the Lord.

   ^15Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the
   oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.

   ^16Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of his
   sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be their
   possession by inheritance.

   ^17But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants,
   then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to
   the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.

   ^18Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance by
   oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall give
   his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be not
   scattered every man from his possession.

   ^19After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the
   gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward the
   north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward.

   ^20Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shall boil
   the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the
   meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court, to
   sanctify the people.

   ^21Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass
   by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the
   court there was a court.

   ^22In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of forty
   cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one measure.

   ^23And there was a row of building round about in them, round about
   them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round
   about.

   ^24Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where
   the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 47

   Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold,
   waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for
   the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came
   down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of
   the altar.

   ^2Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me
   about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh
   eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.

   ^3And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward,
   he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters;
   the waters were to the ancles.

   ^4Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the
   waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me
   through; the waters were to the loins.

   ^5Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not
   pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that
   could not be passed over.

   ^6And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought
   me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.

   ^7Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very
   many trees on the one side and on the other.

   ^8Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country,
   and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought
   forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.

   ^9And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which
   moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there
   shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall
   come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live
   whither the river cometh.

   ^10And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from
   Engedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets;
   their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great
   sea, exceeding many.

   ^11But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be
   healed; they shall be given to salt.

   ^12And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that
   side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither
   shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit
   according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the
   sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
   thereof for medicine.

   ^13Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shall be the border, whereby ye shall
   inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shall
   have two portions.

   ^14And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the
   which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this land
   shall fall unto you for inheritance.

   ^15And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side, from
   the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad;

   ^16Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus
   and the border of Hamath; Hazar-hatticon, which is by the coast of
   Hauran.

   ^17And the border from the sea shall be Hazarenan, the border of
   Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this
   is the north side.

   ^18And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from Damascus,
   and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from the border
   unto the east sea. And this is the east side.

   ^19And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of
   strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south
   side southward.

   ^20The west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till a
   man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.

   ^21So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of
   Israel.

   ^22And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an
   inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you,
   which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as
   born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have
   inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

   ^23And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger
   sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord
   GOD.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 48

   Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast
   of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazarenan, the border of
   Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are his sides
   east and west; a portion for Dan.

   ^2And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, a
   portion for Asher.

   ^3And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west
   side, a portion for Naphtali.

   ^4And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side,
   a portion for Manasseh.

   ^5And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side,
   a portion for Ephraim.

   ^6And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west
   side, a portion for Reuben.

   ^7And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, a
   portion for Judah.

   ^8And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side,
   shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty thousand
   reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, from the
   east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in the midst
   of it.

   ^9The oblation that ye shall offer unto the Lord shall be of five and
   twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

   ^10And for them, even for the priests, shall be this holy oblation;
   toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the
   west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in
   breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and
   the sanctuary of the Lord shall be in the midst thereof.

   ^11It shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of
   Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the
   children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.

   ^12And this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them a
   thing most holy by the border of the Levites.

   ^13And over against the border of the priests the Levites shall have
   five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: all
   the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten
   thousand.

   ^14And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the
   firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the Lord.

   ^15And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against the
   five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the city, for
   dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst thereof.

   ^16And these shall be the measures thereof; the north side four
   thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five
   hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the
   west side four thousand and five hundred.

   ^17And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two hundred
   and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the
   east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.

   ^18And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy
   portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and
   it shall be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the
   increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.

   ^19And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of
   Israel.

   ^20All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and
   twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the
   possession of the city.

   ^21And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the
   other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city, over
   against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east
   border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand toward
   the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and it shall
   be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the
   midst thereof.

   ^22Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession
   of the city, being in the midst of that which is the prince's, between
   the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shall be for the
   prince.

   ^23As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west
   side, Benjamin shall have a portion.

   ^24And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west
   side, Simeon shall have a portion.

   ^25And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side,
   Issachar a portion.

   ^26And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west
   side, Zebulun a portion.

   ^27And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side,
   Gad a portion.

   ^28And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border
   shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh, and to
   the river toward the great sea.

   ^29This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of
   Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord
   GOD.

   ^30And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four
   thousand and five hundred measures.

   ^31And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of
   Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah,
   one gate of Levi.

   ^32And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
   gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.

   ^33And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures: and
   three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of
   Zebulun.

   ^34At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their three
   gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.

   ^35It was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of the
   city from that day shall be, The Lord is there.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Daniel
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
   Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.

   ^2And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of
   the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of
   Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the
   treasure house of his god.

   ^3And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he
   should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's seed,
   and of the princes;

   ^4Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in
   all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and
   such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom
   they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.

   ^5And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and
   of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the
   end thereof they might stand before the king.

   ^6Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
   Mishael, and Azariah:

   ^7Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto
   Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to
   Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abed-nego.

   ^8But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
   with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
   therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
   defile himself.

   ^9Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the
   prince of the eunuchs.

   ^10And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the
   king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he
   see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort?
   then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

   ^11Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set
   over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,

   ^12Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us
   pulse to eat, and water to drink.

   ^13Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
   countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat:
   and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

   ^14So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.

   ^15And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and
   fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the
   king's meat.

   ^16Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that
   they should drink; and gave them pulse.

   ^17As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all
   learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and
   dreams.

   ^18Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring
   them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
   Nebuchadnezzar.

   ^19And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none
   like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they
   before the king.

   ^20And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king
   enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians
   and astrologers that were in all his realm.

   ^21And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar
   dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake
   from him.

   ^2Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers,
   and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams.
   So they came and stood before the king.

   ^3And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit
   was troubled to know the dream.

   ^4Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for
   ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.

   ^5The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from
   me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the
   interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses
   shall be made a dunghill.

   ^6But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall
   receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the
   dream, and the interpretation thereof.

   ^7They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the
   dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.

   ^8The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain
   the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.

   ^9But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one
   decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak
   before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I
   shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.

   ^10The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man
   upon the earth that can shew the king's matter: therefore there is no
   king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or
   astrologer, or Chaldean.

   ^11And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none
   other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling
   is not with flesh.

   ^12For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to
   destroy all the wise men of Babylon.

   ^13And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and
   they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

   ^14Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the captain
   of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of
   Babylon:

   ^15He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the decree
   so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.

   ^16Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him
   time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.

   ^17Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah,
   Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:

   ^18That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this
   secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of
   the wise men of Babylon.

   ^19Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then
   Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

   ^20Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and
   ever: for wisdom and might are his:

   ^21And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and
   setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them
   that know understanding:

   ^22He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the
   darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

   ^23I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast
   given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we
   desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's
   matter.

   ^24Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to
   destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him;
   Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I
   will shew unto the king the interpretation.

   ^25Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste and said thus
   unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will make
   known unto the king the interpretation.

   ^26The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar,
   Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and
   the interpretation thereof?

   ^27Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret
   which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the
   magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;

   ^28But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh
   known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy
   dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;

   ^29As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed,
   what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets
   maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.

   ^30But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that
   I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make known
   the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the
   thoughts of thy heart.

   ^31Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image,
   whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof
   was terrible.

   ^32This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of
   silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

   ^33His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.

   ^34Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote
   the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to
   pieces.

   ^35Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold,
   broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer
   threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was
   found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
   mountain, and filled the whole earth.

   ^36This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof
   before the king.

   ^37Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given
   thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.

   ^38And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field
   and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath
   made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.

   ^39And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and
   another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the
   earth.

   ^40And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron
   breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh
   all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

   ^41And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay,
   and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in
   it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed
   with miry clay.

   ^42And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so
   the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.

   ^43And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle
   themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to
   another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

   ^44And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
   kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be
   left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all
   these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

   ^45Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain
   without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the
   clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the
   king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and
   the interpretation thereof sure.

   ^46Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped
   Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet
   odours unto him.

   ^47The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your
   God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets,
   seeing thou couldst reveal this secret.

   ^48Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great
   gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief
   of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.

   ^49Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and
   Abed-nego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat
   in the gate of the king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was
   threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in
   the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

   ^2Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the
   governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the
   counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come
   to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set
   up.

   ^3Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
   treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the
   provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that
   Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image
   that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

   ^4Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people,
   nations, and languages,

   ^5That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp,
   sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and
   worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:

   ^6And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be
   cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

   ^7Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the
   cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all
   the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped
   the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

   ^8Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the
   Jews.

   ^9They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for
   ever.

   ^10Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the
   sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and
   all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:

   ^11And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast
   into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

   ^12There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the
   province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, O
   king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the
   golden image which thou hast set up.

   ^13Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought these men before
   the king.

   ^14Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abed-nego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden
   image which I have set up?

   ^15Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the
   cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of
   musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; well: but
   if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a
   burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out
   of my hands?

   ^16Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king, O
   Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

   ^17If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
   burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O
   king.

   ^18But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve
   thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

   ^19Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was
   changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: therefore he spake,
   and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more
   than it was wont to be heated.

   ^20And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and to cast them into the burning
   fiery furnace.

   ^21Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their
   hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the
   burning fiery furnace.

   ^22Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the furnace
   exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took up
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- nego.

   ^23And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down
   bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

   ^24Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and
   spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound
   into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True,
   O king.

   ^25He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst
   of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like
   the Son of God.

   ^26Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery
   furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye
   servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then
   Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth of the midst of the fire.

   ^27And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's
   counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies
   the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither
   were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

   ^28Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
   Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his
   servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and
   yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god,
   except their own God.

   ^29Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language,
   which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
   Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a
   dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this
   sort.

   ^30Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the
   province of Babylon.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that
   dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

   ^2I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God
   hath wrought toward me.

   ^3How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom
   is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to
   generation.

   ^4I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my
   palace:

   ^5I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and
   the visions of my head troubled me.

   ^6Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon
   before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the
   dream.

   ^7Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the
   soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not make
   known unto me the interpretation thereof.

   ^8But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was
   Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the
   spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying,

   ^9O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the
   spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell
   me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation
   thereof.

   ^10Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a
   tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.

   ^11The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto
   heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:

   ^12The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it
   was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the
   fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed
   of it.

   ^13I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher
   and an holy one came down from heaven;

   ^14He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his
   branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts
   get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches:

   ^15Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a
   band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be
   wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in
   the grass of the earth:

   ^16Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be
   given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.

   ^17This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the
   word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the
   most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he
   will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.

   ^18This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O
   Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the
   wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the
   interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is
   in thee.

   ^19Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour,
   and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said, Belteshazzar,
   let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee.
   Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate
   thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.

   ^20The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height
   reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;

   ^21Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was
   meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose
   branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation:

   ^22It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy
   greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the
   end of the earth.

   ^23And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from
   heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the
   stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and
   brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew
   of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till
   seven times pass over him;

   ^24This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the
   most High, which is come upon my lord the king:

   ^25That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
   the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen,
   and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall
   pass over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom
   of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

   ^26And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy
   kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that
   the heavens do rule.

   ^27Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break
   off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to
   the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.

   ^28All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.

   ^29At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom
   of Babylon.

   ^30The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have
   built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for
   the honour of my majesty?

   ^31While the word was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from
   heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The
   kingdom is departed from thee.

   ^32And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
   the beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and
   seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High
   ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.

   ^33The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he
   was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet
   with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles feathers,
   and his nails like birds' claws.

   ^34And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto
   heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most
   High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose
   dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation
   to generation:

   ^35And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he
   doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
   inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
   What doest thou?

   ^36At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my
   kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my
   counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my
   kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.

   ^37Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven,
   all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk
   in pride he is able to abase.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and
   drank wine before the thousand.

   ^2Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden
   and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the
   temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his
   wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.

   ^3Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the
   temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and
   his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.

   ^4They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of
   brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

   ^5In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over
   against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king's
   palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.

   ^6Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
   him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote
   one against another.

   ^7The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and
   the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise men of
   Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the
   interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain
   of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.

   ^8Then came in all the king's wise men: but they could not read the
   writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.

   ^9Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was
   changed in him, and his lords were astonied.

   ^10Now the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords,
   came into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, O king, live
   for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be
   changed:

   ^11There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy
   gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom,
   like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king
   Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of
   the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers;

   ^12Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding,
   interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving
   of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named
   Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the
   interpretation.

   ^13Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and
   said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of
   the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry?

   ^14I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee,
   and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.

   ^15And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in before
   me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the
   interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of
   the thing:

   ^16And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and
   dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to
   me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and
   have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in
   the kingdom.

   ^17Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to
   thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the writing
   unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.

   ^18O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a
   kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:

   ^19And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and
   languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew; and
   whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he
   would he put down.

   ^20But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he
   was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:

   ^21And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like
   the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with
   grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he
   knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he
   appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

   ^22And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though
   thou knewest all this;

   ^23But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have
   brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords,
   thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast
   praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone,
   which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath
   is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified:

   ^24Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was
   written.

   ^25And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL,
   UPHARSIN.

   ^26This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy
   kingdom, and finished it.

   ^27TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.

   ^28PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.

   ^29Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and
   put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning
   him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.

   ^30In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.

   ^31And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and
   two years old.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty
   princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;

   ^2And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the
   princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no
   damage.

   ^3Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes,
   because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him
   over the whole realm.

   ^4Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against
   Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor
   fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or
   fault found in him.

   ^5Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this
   Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

   ^6Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king, and
   said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.

   ^7All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes,
   the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish
   a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a
   petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he
   shall be cast into the den of lions.

   ^8Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be
   not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which
   altereth not.

   ^9Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.

   ^10Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
   house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he
   kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks
   before his God, as he did aforetime.

   ^11Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making
   supplication before his God.

   ^12Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king's
   decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a
   petition of any God or man within thirty days, save of thee, O king,
   shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The
   thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which
   altereth not.

   ^13Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is
   of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king,
   nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three
   times a day.

   ^14Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with
   himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured
   till the going down of the sun to deliver him.

   ^15Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king,
   Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree
   nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.

   ^16Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into
   the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom
   thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.

   ^17And a stone was brought and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the
   king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords;
   that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.

   ^18Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting:
   neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep
   went from him.

   ^19Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste
   unto the den of lions.

   ^20And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto
   Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the
   living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver
   thee from the lions?

   ^21Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.

   ^22My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions mouths, that
   they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in
   me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.

   ^23Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they
   should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the
   den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in
   his God.

   ^24And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused
   Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their children,
   and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all
   their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.

   ^25Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that
   dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.

   ^26I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble
   and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and
   stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,
   and his dominion shall be even unto the end.

   ^27He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in
   heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the
   lions.

   ^28So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of
   Cyrus the Persian.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and
   visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, and told the
   sum of the matters.

   ^2Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the
   four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea.

   ^3And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another.

   ^4The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings: I beheld till the
   wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and
   made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart was given to it.

   ^5And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised up
   itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of it between
   the teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.

   ^6After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had upon
   the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads; and
   dominion was given to it.

   ^7After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast,
   dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron
   teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with
   the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before
   it; and it had ten horns.

   ^8I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another
   little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up
   by the roots: and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man,
   and a mouth speaking great things.

   ^9I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did
   sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the
   pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as
   burning fire.

   ^10A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand
   thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
   stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.

   ^11I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn
   spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed,
   and given to the burning flame.

   ^12As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken
   away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.

   ^13I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man
   came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and
   they brought him near before him.

   ^14And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
   people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an
   everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that
   which shall not be destroyed.

   ^15I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the
   visions of my head troubled me.

   ^16I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth
   of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the
   things.

   ^17These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall
   arise out of the earth.

   ^18But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess
   the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.

   ^19Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse
   from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and
   his nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the
   residue with his feet;

   ^20And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which
   came up, and before whom three fell; even of that horn that had eyes,
   and a mouth that spake very great things, whose look was more stout
   than his fellows.

   ^21I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed
   against them;

   ^22Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints
   of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the
   kingdom.

   ^23Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon
   earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the
   whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

   ^24And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall
   arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from
   the first, and he shall subdue three kings.

   ^25And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear
   out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws:
   and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and the
   dividing of time.

   ^26But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion,
   to consume and to destroy it unto the end.

   ^27And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
   the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the
   most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions
   shall serve and obey him.

   ^28Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations
   much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the
   matter in my heart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared
   unto me, even unto me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the
   first.

   ^2And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I was at
   Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a
   vision, and I was by the river of Ulai.

   ^3Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before
   the river a ram which had two horns: and the two horns were high; but
   one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.

   ^4I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that
   no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could
   deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became
   great.

   ^5And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on
   the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat
   had a notable horn between his eyes.

   ^6And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing
   before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power.

   ^7And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler
   against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was
   no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the
   ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the
   ram out of his hand.

   ^8Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the
   great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones toward the
   four winds of heaven.

   ^9And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed
   exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the
   pleasant land.

   ^10And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and it cast down
   some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.

   ^11Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the host, and by him
   the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was
   cast down.

   ^12And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of
   transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it
   practised, and prospered.

   ^13Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that
   certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the
   daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the
   sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?

   ^14And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then
   shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

   ^15And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, and
   sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the
   appearance of a man.

   ^16And I heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called,
   and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.

   ^17So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was afraid, and
   fell upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for
   at the time of the end shall be the vision.

   ^18Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face
   toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright.

   ^19And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last
   end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end shall be.

   ^20The ram which thou sawest having two horns are the kings of Media
   and Persia.

   ^21And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is
   between his eyes is the first king.

   ^22Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms
   shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his power.

   ^23And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are
   come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark
   sentences, shall stand up.

   ^24And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power: and he
   shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall
   destroy the mighty and the holy people.

   ^25And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his
   hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall
   destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but
   he shall be broken without hand.

   ^26And the vision of the evening and the morning which was told is
   true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it shall be for many days.

   ^27And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose
   up, and did the king's business; and I was astonished at the vision,
   but none understood it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the
   Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;

   ^2In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the
   number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the
   prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of
   Jerusalem.

   ^3And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
   supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:

   ^4And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said,
   O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to
   them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments;

   ^5We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,
   and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy
   judgments:

   ^6Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake
   in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the
   people of the land.

   ^7O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of
   faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off,
   through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of
   their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.

   ^8O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our
   princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.

   ^9To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have
   rebelled against him;

   ^10Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his
   laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.

   ^11Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that
   they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us,
   and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God,
   because we have sinned against him.

   ^12And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and
   against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil:
   for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon
   Jerusalem.

   ^13As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us:
   yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn
   from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.

   ^14Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon
   us: for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he doeth:
   for we obeyed not his voice.

   ^15And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of
   the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown, as
   at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.

   ^16O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let
   thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy
   holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our
   fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are
   about us.

   ^17Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
   supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is
   desolate, for the Lord's sake.

   ^18O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold
   our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do
   not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but
   for thy great mercies.

   ^19O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not,
   for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy people are called by
   thy name.

   ^20And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and
   the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the
   Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God;

   ^21Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I
   had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,
   touched me about the time of the evening oblation.

   ^22And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now
   come forth to give thee skill and understanding.

   ^23At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth,
   and I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore
   understand the matter, and consider the vision.

   ^24Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city,
   to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
   reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness,
   and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.

   ^25Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
   commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the
   Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street
   shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.

   ^26And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not
   for himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy
   the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood,
   and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.

   ^27And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the
   midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to
   cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it
   desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be
   poured upon the desolate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto
   Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, but
   the time appointed was long: and he understood the thing, and had
   understanding of the vision.

   ^2In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.

   ^3I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth,
   neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were
   fulfilled.

   ^4And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the
   side of the great river, which is Hiddekel;

   ^5Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man
   clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:

   ^6His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of
   lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet
   like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the
   voice of a multitude.

   ^7And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw
   not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled
   to hide themselves.

   ^8Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there
   remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into
   corruption, and I retained no strength.

   ^9Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his
   words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the
   ground.

   ^10And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon
   the palms of my hands.

   ^11And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the
   words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am I now
   sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling.

   ^12Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that
   thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before
   thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words.

   ^13But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty
   days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and
   I remained there with the kings of Persia.

   ^14Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people
   in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days.

   ^15And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the
   ground, and I became dumb.

   ^16And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men touched my
   lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood
   before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and
   I have retained no strength.

   ^17For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? for
   as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is
   there breath left in me.

   ^18Then there came again and touched me one like the appearance of a
   man, and he strengthened me,

   ^19And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace be unto thee, be
   strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I was
   strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened
   me.

   ^20Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now will
   I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth,
   lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.

   ^21But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth:
   and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael
   your prince.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stood to confirm
   and to strengthen him.

   ^2And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet
   three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they
   all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all
   against the realm of Grecia.

   ^3And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great
   dominion, and do according to his will.

   ^4And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be
   divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor
   according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be
   plucked up, even for others beside those.

   ^5And the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his princes;
   and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall
   be a great dominion.

   ^6And in the end of years they shall join themselves together; for the
   king's daughter of the south shall come to the king of the north to
   make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm;
   neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and
   they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened
   her in these times.

   ^7But out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his estate,
   which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the
   king of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail:

   ^8And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their
   princes, and with their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and he
   shall continue more years than the king of the north.

   ^9So the king of the south shall come into his kingdom, and shall
   return into his own land.

   ^10But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of
   great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass
   through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to his fortress.

   ^11And the king of the south shall be moved with choler, and shall come
   forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north: and he shall
   set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shall be given into his
   hand.

   ^12And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted
   up; and he shall cast down many ten thousands: but he shall not be
   strengthened by it.

   ^13For the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a
   multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come after
   certain years with a great army and with much riches.

   ^14And in those times there shall many stand up against the king of the
   south: also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to
   establish the vision; but they shall fall.

   ^15So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount, and take
   the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall not withstand,
   neither his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to
   withstand.

   ^16But he that cometh against him shall do according to his own will,
   and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in the glorious
   land, which by his hand shall be consumed.

   ^17He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole
   kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give
   him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she shall not stand on
   his side, neither be for him.

   ^18After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take
   many: but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered
   by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn
   upon him.

   ^19Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he
   shall stumble and fall, and not be found.

   ^20Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of
   the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in
   anger, nor in battle.

   ^21And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall
   not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and
   obtain the kingdom by flatteries.

   ^22And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before
   him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.

   ^23And after the league made with him he shall work deceitfully: for he
   shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people.

   ^24He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the
   province; and he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his
   fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and
   riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices against the strong
   holds, even for a time.

   ^25And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of
   the south with a great army; and the king of the south shall be stirred
   up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand:
   for they shall forecast devices against him.

   ^26Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him,
   and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.

   ^27And both these kings' hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall
   speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end
   shall be at the time appointed.

   ^28Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart
   shall be against the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits, and
   return to his own land.

   ^29At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south;
   but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.

   ^30For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore he shall
   be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant:
   so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them
   that forsake the holy covenant.

   ^31And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the
   sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and
   they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.

   ^32And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by
   flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and
   do exploits.

   ^33And they that understand among the people shall instruct many: yet
   they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil,
   many days.

   ^34Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help:
   but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.

   ^35And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to
   purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because it
   is yet for a time appointed.

   ^36And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt
   himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak
   marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the
   indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall be done.

   ^37Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of
   women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.

   ^38But in his estate shall he honour the God of forces: and a god whom
   his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with
   precious stones, and pleasant things.

   ^39Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom
   he shall acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shall cause them
   to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain.

   ^40And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him:
   and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with
   chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter
   into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.

   ^41He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall
   be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and
   Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.

   ^42He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the
   land of Egypt shall not escape.

   ^43But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver,
   and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the
   Ethiopians shall be at his steps.

   ^44But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him:
   therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to
   make away many.

   ^45And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in
   the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none
   shall help him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which
   standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of
   trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same
   time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that
   shall be found written in the book.

   ^2And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
   some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

   ^3And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament;
   and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and
   ever.

   ^4But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the
   time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
   increased.

   ^5Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on
   this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the
   bank of the river.

   ^6And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters
   of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?

   ^7And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of
   the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto
   heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a
   time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to
   scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be
   finished.

   ^8And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall
   be the end of these things?

   ^9And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up and
   sealed till the time of the end.

   ^10Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked
   shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the
   wise shall understand.

   ^11And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and
   the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand
   two hundred and ninety days.

   ^12Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred
   and five and thirty days.

   ^13But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand
   in thy lot at the end of the days.
     __________________________________________________________________

Hosea
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the
   days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the
   days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.

   ^2The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea. And the Lord said to
   Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of
   whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from
   the Lord.

   ^3So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived,
   and bare him a son.

   ^4And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little
   while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
   and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.

   ^5And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of
   Israel in the valley of Jezreel.

   ^6And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And God said unto him,
   Call her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon the house
   of Israel; but I will utterly take them away.

   ^7But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by
   the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
   battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

   ^8Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.

   ^9Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for ye are not my people, and I
   will not be your God.

   ^10Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
   sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it shall come to pass,
   that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people,
   there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.

   ^11Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be
   gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come
   up out of the land: for great shall be the day of Jezreel.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ru-hamah.

   ^2Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I
   her husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight,
   and her adulteries from between her breasts;

   ^3Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born,
   and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her
   with thirst.

   ^4And I will not have mercy upon her children; for they be the children
   of whoredoms.

   ^5For their mother hath played the harlot: she that conceived them hath
   done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me
   my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink.

   ^6Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a
   wall, that she shall not find her paths.

   ^7And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake
   them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she
   say, I will go and return to my first husband; for then was it better
   with me than now.

   ^8For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
   multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.

   ^9Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof,
   and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax
   given to cover her nakedness.

   ^10And now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and
   none shall deliver her out of mine hand.

   ^11I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new
   moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.

   ^12And I will destroy her vines and her fig trees, whereof she hath
   said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will
   make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.

   ^13And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burned
   incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings and her
   jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the Lord.

   ^14Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the
   wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.

   ^15And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of
   Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the days of
   her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.

   ^16And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, that thou shalt call me
   Ishi; and shalt call me no more Baali.

   ^17For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they
   shall no more be remembered by their name.

   ^18And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of
   the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things
   of the ground: and I will break the bow and the sword and the battle
   out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.

   ^19And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee
   unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and
   in mercies.

   ^20I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness: and thou shalt
   know the Lord.

   ^21And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the Lord,
   I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth;

   ^22And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and
   they shall hear Jezreel.

   ^23And I will sow her unto me in the earth; and I will have mercy upon
   her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not
   my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friend,
   yet an adulteress, according to the love of the Lord toward the
   children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of wine.

   ^2So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer
   of barley, and an half homer of barley:

   ^3And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for me many days; thou shalt
   not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man: so will I
   also be for thee.

   ^4For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and
   without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and
   without an ephod, and without teraphim:

   ^5Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord
   their God, and David their king; and shall fear the Lord and his
   goodness in the latter days.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord hath a
   controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no
   truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.

   ^2By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
   adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.

   ^3Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein
   shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of
   heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.

   ^4Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: for thy people are as
   they that strive with the priest.

   ^5Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also shall fall
   with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.

   ^6My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast
   rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no
   priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will
   also forget thy children.

   ^7As they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will I
   change their glory into shame.

   ^8They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their
   iniquity.

   ^9And there shall be, like people, like priest: and I will punish them
   for their ways, and reward them their doings.

   ^10For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit whoredom,
   and shall not increase: because they have left off to take heed to the
   Lord.

   ^11Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.

   ^12My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth
   unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and
   they have gone a whoring from under their God.

   ^13They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon
   the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof
   is good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your
   spouses shall commit adultery.

   ^14I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your
   spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with
   whores, and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that doth
   not understand shall fall.

   ^15Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend; and
   come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven, nor swear, The
   Lord liveth.

   ^16For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will
   feed them as a lamb in a large place.

   ^17Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone.

   ^18Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her
   rulers with shame do love, Give ye.

   ^19The wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed
   because of their sacrifices.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye house of Israel; and give ye
   ear, O house of the king; for judgment is toward you, because ye have
   been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.

   ^2And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been
   a rebuker of them all.

   ^3I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim,
   thou committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled.

   ^4They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God: for the
   spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known
   the Lord.

   ^5And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face: therefore shall
   Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with
   them.

   ^6They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
   Lord; but they shall not find him; he hath withdrawn himself from them.

   ^7They have dealt treacherously against the Lord: for they have
   begotten strange children: now shall a month devour them with their
   portions.

   ^8Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud at
   Bethaven, after thee, O Benjamin.

   ^9Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of
   Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.

   ^10The princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore
   I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

   ^11Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly
   walked after the commandment.

   ^12Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of
   Judah as rottenness.

   ^13When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went
   Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb: yet could he not heal
   you, nor cure you of your wound.

   ^14For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the
   house of Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away; I will take away, and
   none shall rescue him.

   ^15I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
   offence, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will
   heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.

   ^2After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us
   up, and we shall live in his sight.

   ^3Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth
   is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as
   the latter and former rain unto the earth.

   ^4O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
   thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
   goeth away.

   ^5Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the
   words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth.

   ^6For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more
   than burnt offerings.

   ^7But they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they
   dealt treacherously against me.

   ^8Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
   blood.

   ^9And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests
   murder in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.

   ^10I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: there is the
   whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.

   ^11Also, O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned the
   captivity of my people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
   discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood;
   and the thief cometh in, and the troop of robbers spoileth without.

   ^2And they consider not in their hearts that I remember all their
   wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about; they are before
   my face.

   ^3They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the princes with
   their lies.

   ^4They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who ceaseth
   from raising after he hath kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.

   ^5In the day of our king the princes have made him sick with bottles of
   wine; he stretched out his hand with scorners.

   ^6For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie in
   wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the morning it burneth as
   a flaming fire.

   ^7They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; all
   their kings are fallen: there is none among them that calleth unto me.

   ^8Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake
   not turned.

   ^9Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea,
   gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.

   ^10And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face: and they do not
   return to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this.

   ^11Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart: they call to Egypt,
   they go to Assyria.

   ^12When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them; I will bring
   them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their
   congregation hath heard.

   ^13Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto them!
   because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed them,
   yet they have spoken lies against me.

   ^14And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled
   upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they
   rebel against me.

   ^15Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine
   mischief against me.

   ^16They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful
   bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their
   tongue: this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Set the trumpet to thy mouth. He shall come as an eagle against the
   house of the Lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and
   trespassed against my law.

   ^2Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.

   ^3Israel hath cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue
   him.

   ^4They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I
   knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them idols,
   that they may be cut off.

   ^5Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled
   against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?

   ^6For from Israel was it also: the workman made it; therefore it is not
   God: but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.

   ^7For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it
   hath no stalk: the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the
   strangers shall swallow it up.

   ^8Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be among the Gentiles as a
   vessel wherein is no pleasure.

   ^9For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim
   hath hired lovers.

   ^10Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather
   them, and they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the king of
   princes.

   ^11Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto
   him to sin.

   ^12I have written to him the great things of my law, but they were
   counted as a strange thing.

   ^13They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat
   it; but the Lord accepteth them not; now will he remember their
   iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt.

   ^14For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah
   hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities,
   and it shall devour the palaces thereof.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a
   whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward upon every cornfloor.

   ^2The floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine
   shall fail in her.

   ^3They shall not dwell in the Lord'S land; but Ephraim shall return to
   Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.

   ^4They shall not offer wine offerings to the Lord, neither shall they
   be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread
   of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their bread
   for their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord.

   ^5What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the
   Lord?

   ^6For, lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt shall gather
   them up, Memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for their silver,
   nettles shall possess them: thorns shall be in their tabernacles.

   ^7The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come;
   Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad,
   for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.

   ^8The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the prophet is a snare
   of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.

   ^9They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah:
   therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.

   ^10I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness; I saw your fathers as
   the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to
   Baalpeor, and separated themselves unto that shame; and their
   abominations were according as they loved.

   ^11As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird, from the
   birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.

   ^12Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that
   there shall not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when I depart from
   them!

   ^13Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim
   shall bring forth his children to the murderer.

   ^14Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying womb
   and dry breasts.

   ^15All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the
   wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I will
   love them no more: all their princes are revolters.

   ^16Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no
   fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved
   fruit of their womb.

   ^17My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him:
   and they shall be wanderers among the nations.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself:
   according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars;
   according to the goodness of his land they have made goodly images.

   ^2Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall
   break down their altars, he shall spoil their images.

   ^3For now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not the
   Lord; what then should a king do to us?

   ^4They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus
   judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.

   ^5The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the calves of
   Bethaven: for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests
   thereof that rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is
   departed from it.

   ^6It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to king Jareb:
   Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own
   counsel.

   ^7As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water.

   ^8The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed:
   the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall
   say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.

   ^9O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they stood:
   the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake
   them.

   ^10It is in my desire that I should chastise them; and the people shall
   be gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in their two
   furrows.

   ^11And Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread out
   the corn; but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to
   ride; Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods.

   ^12Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your
   fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain
   righteousness upon you.

   ^13Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten
   the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the
   multitude of thy mighty men.

   ^14Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy
   fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Beth- arbel in the day
   of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.

   ^15So shall Bethel do unto you because of your great wickedness: in a
   morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of
   Egypt.

   ^2As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto
   Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.

   ^3I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they knew
   not that I healed them.

   ^4I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to
   them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto
   them.

   ^5He shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be
   his king, because they refused to return.

   ^6And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his
   branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels.

   ^7And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called
   them to the most High, none at all would exalt him.

   ^8How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?
   how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine
   heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.

   ^9I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to
   destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man; the Holy One in the midst
   of thee: and I will not enter into the city.

   ^10They shall walk after the Lord: he shall roar like a lion: when he
   shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west.

   ^11They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the
   land of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the Lord.

   ^12Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with
   deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the saints.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he daily
   increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with the
   Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.

   ^2The Lord hath also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob
   according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him.

   ^3He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he
   had power with God:

   ^4Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made
   supplication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spake with
   us;

   ^5Even the Lord God of hosts; the Lord is his memorial.

   ^6Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on
   thy God continually.

   ^7He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loveth
   to oppress.

   ^8And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out
   substance: in all my labours they shall find none iniquity in me that
   were sin.

   ^9And I that am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt will yet make
   thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.

   ^10I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions,
   and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets.

   ^11Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity: they sacrifice
   bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of
   the fields.

   ^12And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a
   wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.

   ^13And by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a
   prophet was he preserved.

   ^14Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall he
   leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto
   him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
   offended in Baal, he died.

   ^2And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of
   their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all of it
   the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice
   kiss the calves.

   ^3Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew
   that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out
   of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

   ^4Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know
   no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me.

   ^5I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.

   ^6According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled,
   and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.

   ^7Therefore I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way will
   I observe them:

   ^8I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will
   rend the caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a lion:
   the wild beast shall tear them.

   ^9O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help.

   ^10I will be thy king: where is any other that may save thee in all thy
   cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a king and princes?

   ^11I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.

   ^12The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid.

   ^13The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him: he is an
   unwise son; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking
   forth of children.

   ^14I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them
   from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy
   destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.

   ^15Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an east wind shall come,
   the wind of the Lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring
   shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall spoil
   the treasure of all pleasant vessels.

   ^16Samaria shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her
   God: they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in
   pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine
   iniquity.

   ^2Take with you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away
   all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves
   of our lips.

   ^3Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will
   we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee
   the fatherless findeth mercy.

   ^4I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine
   anger is turned away from him.

   ^5I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast
   forth his roots as Lebanon.

   ^6His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree,
   and his smell as Lebanon.

   ^7They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive as
   the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine
   of Lebanon.

   ^8Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have
   heard him, and observed him: I am like a green fir tree. From me is thy
   fruit found.

   ^9Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he
   shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall
   walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.
     __________________________________________________________________

Joel
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.

   ^2Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land.
   Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?

   ^3Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their
   children, and their children another generation.

   ^4That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that
   which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which
   the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiller eaten.

   ^5Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine,
   because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.

   ^6For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number,
   whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a
   great lion.

   ^7He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree: he hath made it
   clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white.

   ^8Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her
   youth.

   ^9The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house of
   the Lord; the priests, the Lord'S ministers, mourn.

   ^10The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted: the
   new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.

   ^11Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedressers, for the
   wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.

   ^12The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth; the pomegranate
   tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the
   field, are withered: because joy is withered away from the sons of men.

   ^13Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the
   altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for
   the meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the house
   of your God.

   ^14Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and
   all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God,
   and cry unto the Lord,

   ^15Alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a
   destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

   ^16Is not the meat cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from
   the house of our God?

   ^17The seed is rotten under their clods, the garners are laid desolate,
   the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.

   ^18How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because
   they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.

   ^19O Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire hath devoured the pastures
   of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned all the trees of the
   field.

   ^20The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters
   are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the
   wilderness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain:
   let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord
   cometh, for it is nigh at hand;

   ^2A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
   darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and
   a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more
   after it, even to the years of many generations.

   ^3A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth: the
   land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
   wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.

   ^4The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as
   horsemen, so shall they run.

   ^5Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap,
   like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a
   strong people set in battle array.

   ^6Before their face the people shall be much pained: all faces shall
   gather blackness.

   ^7They shall run like mighty men; they shall climb the wall like men of
   war; and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not
   break their ranks:

   ^8Neither shall one thrust another; they shall walk every one in his
   path: and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.

   ^9They shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon the wall,
   they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows
   like a thief.

   ^10The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: the
   sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their
   shining:

   ^11And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp is
   very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of
   the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?

   ^12Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your
   heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:

   ^13And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
   your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
   kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.

   ^14Who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
   behind him; even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord
   your God?

   ^15Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly:

   ^16Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders,
   gather the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the
   bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.

   ^17Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch
   and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
   thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them:
   wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?

   ^18Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.

   ^19Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will
   send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith:
   and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen:

   ^20But I will remove far off from you the northern army, and will drive
   him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea,
   and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up,
   and his ill savour shall come up, because he hath done great things.

   ^21Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the Lord will do great
   things.

   ^22Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the
   wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and
   the vine do yield their strength.

   ^23Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God:
   for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to
   come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the
   first month.

   ^24And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow
   with wine and oil.

   ^25And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the
   cankerworm, and the caterpiller, and the palmerworm, my great army
   which I sent among you.

   ^26And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of
   the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people
   shall never be ashamed.

   ^27And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am
   the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed.

   ^28And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit
   upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your
   old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:

   ^29And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will
   I pour out my spirit.

   ^30And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and
   fire, and pillars of smoke.

   ^31The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood,
   before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.

   ^32And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of
   the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall
   be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord
   shall call.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again
   the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,

   ^2I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
   valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and
   for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and
   parted my land.

   ^3And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an
   harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.

   ^4Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and all the
   coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye
   recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon
   your own head;

   ^5Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into
   your temples my goodly pleasant things:

   ^6The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold
   unto the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.

   ^7Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them,
   and will return your recompence upon your own head:

   ^8And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
   children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people
   far off: for the Lord hath spoken it.

   ^9Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty
   men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up:

   ^10Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears:
   let the weak say, I am strong.

   ^11Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves
   together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O
   Lord.

   ^12Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of
   Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.

   ^13Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down;
   for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is
   great.

   ^14Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the
   Lord is near in the valley of decision.

   ^15The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw
   their shining.

   ^16The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
   Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will
   be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.

   ^17So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, my
   holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no
   strangers pass through her any more.

   ^18And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop
   down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers
   of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the
   house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim.

   ^19Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate
   wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because
   they have shed innocent blood in their land.

   ^20But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to
   generation.

   ^21For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed: for the
   Lord dwelleth in Zion.
     __________________________________________________________________

Amos
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw
   concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days
   of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the
   earthquake.

   ^2And he said, The Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from
   Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the
   top of Carmel shall wither.

   ^3Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Damascus, and for
   four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have
   threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:

   ^4But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour
   the palaces of Benhadad.

   ^5I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant
   from the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house
   of Eden: and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir,
   saith the Lord.

   ^6Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four,
   I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they carried away
   captive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom:

   ^7But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the
   palaces thereof:

   ^8And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth
   the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand against Ekron: and
   the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four,
   I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up
   the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant:

   ^10But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the
   palaces thereof.

   ^11Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Edom, and for four,
   I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue his
   brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did
   tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever:

   ^12But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of
   Bozrah.

   ^13Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of the children of
   Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof;
   because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they
   might enlarge their border:

   ^14But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour
   the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest
   in the day of the whirlwind:

   ^15And their king shall go into captivity, he and his princes together,
   saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I
   will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he burned the bones
   of the king of Edom into lime:

   ^2But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of
   Kirioth: and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the
   sound of the trumpet:

   ^3And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay
   all the princes thereof with him, saith the Lord.

   ^4Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Judah, and for four,
   I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have despised
   the law of the Lord, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies
   caused them to err, after the which their fathers have walked:

   ^5But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of
   Jerusalem.

   ^6Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Israel, and for
   four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold
   the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes;

   ^7That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and
   turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in
   unto the same maid, to profane my holy name:

   ^8And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every
   altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their
   god.

   ^9Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the
   height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed
   his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.

   ^10Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty
   years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.

   ^11And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for
   Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel? saith the
   Lord.

   ^12But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink; and commanded the prophets,
   saying, Prophesy not.

   ^13Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of
   sheaves.

   ^14Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong
   shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver
   himself:

   ^15Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is swift
   of foot shall not deliver himself: neither shall he that rideth the
   horse deliver himself.

   ^16And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in
   that day, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Hear this word that the Lord hath spoken against you, O children of
   Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of
   Egypt, saying,

   ^2You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I
   will punish you for all your iniquities.

   ^3Can two walk together, except they be agreed?

   ^4Will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a young
   lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?

   ^5Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him?
   shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at
   all?

   ^6Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?
   shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it?

   ^7Surely the Lord GOD will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto
   his servants the prophets.

   ^8The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord GOD hath spoken,
   who can but prophesy?

   ^9Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of
   Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and
   behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the
   midst thereof.

   ^10For they know not to do right, saith the Lord, who store up violence
   and robbery in their palaces.

   ^11Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; An adversary there shall be even
   round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee,
   and thy palaces shall be spoiled.

   ^12Thus saith the Lord; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the
   lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be
   taken out that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus
   in a couch.

   ^13Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord GOD, the
   God of hosts,

   ^14That in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon
   him I will also visit the altars of Bethel: and the horns of the altar
   shall be cut off, and fall to the ground.

   ^15And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the
   houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end,
   saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria,
   which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their
   masters, Bring, and let us drink.

   ^2The Lord GOD hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall
   come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your
   posterity with fishhooks.

   ^3And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that which is
   before her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the Lord.

   ^4Come to Bethel, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply transgression; and
   bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three years:

   ^5And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and
   publish the free offerings: for this liketh you, O ye children of
   Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

   ^6And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and
   want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto me,
   saith the Lord.

   ^7And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet
   three months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon one city, and
   caused it not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and
   the piece whereupon it rained not withered.

   ^8So two or three cities wandered unto one city, to drink water; but
   they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the
   Lord.

   ^9I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: when your gardens and
   your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees increased, the
   palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the
   Lord.

   ^10I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your
   young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses;
   and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils:
   yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.

   ^11I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah,
   and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not
   returned unto me, saith the Lord.

   ^12Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do
   this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

   ^13For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and
   declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the morning
   darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, The Lord, The
   God of hosts, is his name.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O
   house of Israel.

   ^2The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is
   forsaken upon her land; there is none to raise her up.

   ^3For thus saith the Lord GOD; The city that went out by a thousand
   shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred shall
   leave ten, to the house of Israel.

   ^4For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye
   shall live:

   ^5But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to
   Beersheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall
   come to nought.

   ^6Seek the Lord, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in the
   house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in
   Bethel.

   ^7Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the
   earth,

   ^8Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the
   shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night:
   that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the
   face of the earth: The Lord is his name:

   ^9That strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the
   spoiled shall come against the fortress.

   ^10They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that
   speaketh uprightly.

   ^11Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take
   from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye
   shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye
   shall not drink wine of them.

   ^12For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins: they
   afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in
   the gate from their right.

   ^13Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is an
   evil time.

   ^14Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the Lord, the God
   of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.

   ^15Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
   gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious unto the
   remnant of Joseph.

   ^16Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith thus; Wailing
   shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the highways, Alas!
   alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are
   skilful of lamentation to wailing.

   ^17And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through thee,
   saith the Lord.

   ^18Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for
   you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.

   ^19As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into
   the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.

   ^20Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very
   dark, and no brightness in it?

   ^21I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your
   solemn assemblies.

   ^22Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will
   not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
   beasts.

   ^23Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear
   the melody of thy viols.

   ^24But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty
   stream.

   ^25Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness
   forty years, O house of Israel?

   ^26But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your
   images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves.

   ^27Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus,
   saith the Lord, whose name is The God of hosts.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of
   Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of
   Israel came!

   ^2Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and from thence go ye to Hamath the
   great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they better than
   these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border?

   ^3Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to
   come near;

   ^4That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
   couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the
   midst of the stall;

   ^5That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves
   instruments of musick, like David;

   ^6That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
   ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

   ^7Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive,
   and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed.

   ^8The Lord GOD hath sworn by himself, saith the Lord the God of hosts,
   I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I
   deliver up the city with all that is therein.

   ^9And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that
   they shall die.

   ^10And a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to
   bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by
   the sides of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say,
   No. Then shall he say, Hold thy tongue: for we may not make mention of
   the name of the Lord.

   ^11For, behold, the Lord commandeth, and he will smite the great house
   with breaches, and the little house with clefts.

   ^12Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen? for
   ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
   hemlock:

   ^13Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not taken
   to us horns by our own strength?

   ^14But, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of
   Israel, saith the Lord the God of hosts; and they shall afflict you
   from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of the wilderness.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed
   grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth;
   and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.

   ^2And it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the
   grass of the land, then I said, O Lord GOD, forgive, I beseech thee: by
   whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.

   ^3The Lord repented for this: It shall not be, saith the Lord.

   ^4Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and, behold, the Lord GOD
   called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat
   up a part.

   ^5Then said I, O Lord GOD, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob
   arise? for he is small.

   ^6The Lord repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord
   GOD.

   ^7Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a
   plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.

   ^8And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A
   plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the
   midst of my people Israel: I will not again pass by them any more:

   ^9And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries
   of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the house of
   Jeroboam with the sword.

   ^10Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel,
   saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of
   Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.

   ^11For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel
   shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.

   ^12Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into
   the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there:

   ^13But prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the king's
   chapel, and it is the king's court.

   ^14Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither
   was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore
   fruit:

   ^15And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto
   me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.

   ^16Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord: Thou sayest, Prophesy
   not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.

   ^17Therefore thus saith the Lord; Thy wife shall be an harlot in the
   city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy
   land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land:
   and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and behold a basket of summer
   fruit.

   ^2And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of summer
   fruit. Then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of
   Israel; I will not again pass by them any more.

   ^3And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, saith the
   Lord GOD: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they shall
   cast them forth with silence.

   ^4Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of
   the land to fail,

   ^5Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and
   the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and
   the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?

   ^6That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of
   shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?

   ^7The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never
   forget any of their works.

   ^8Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
   dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall
   be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.

   ^9And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord GOD, that I
   will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in
   the clear day:

   ^10And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into
   lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness
   upon every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and
   the end thereof as a bitter day.

   ^11Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I will send a famine
   in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of
   hearing the words of the Lord:

   ^12And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to
   the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and
   shall not find it.

   ^13In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst.

   ^14They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan,
   liveth; and, The manner of Beersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and
   never rise up again.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   I saw the Lord standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the lintel
   of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head, all of
   them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he that fleeth
   of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them shall not be
   delivered.

   ^2Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though
   they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down:

   ^3And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search
   and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the
   bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite
   them:

   ^4And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
   command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes
   upon them for evil, and not for good.

   ^5And the Lord GOD of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it shall
   melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise up
   wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.

   ^6It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath founded
   his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters of the sea, and
   poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The Lord is his name.

   ^7Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of
   Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of
   Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?

   ^8Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom, and I
   will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that I will not
   utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.

   ^9For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among
   all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least
   grain fall upon the earth.

   ^10All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The
   evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

   ^11In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,
   and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I
   will build it as in the days of old:

   ^12That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen,
   which are called by my name, saith the Lord that doeth this.

   ^13Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall
   overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed;
   and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.

   ^14And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and
   they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall
   plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make
   gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

   ^15And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be
   pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy
   God.
     __________________________________________________________________

Obadiah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

  Chapter 1

   The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning Edom; We have
   heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the
   heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.

   ^2Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
   despised.

   ^3The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in
   the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his
   heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?

   ^4Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest
   among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.

   ^5If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off!)
   would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the grapegatherers
   came to thee, would they not leave some grapes?

   ^6How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hidden things
   sought up!

   ^7All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border:
   the men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed
   against thee; they that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee:
   there is none understanding in him.

   ^8Shall I not in that day, saith the Lord, even destroy the wise men
   out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau?

   ^9And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every
   one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.

   ^10For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee,
   and thou shalt be cut off for ever.

   ^11In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the
   strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into
   his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.

   ^12But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the
   day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced
   over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither
   shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress.

   ^13Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the
   day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their
   affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their
   substance in the day of their calamity;

   ^14Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those
   of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those
   of his that did remain in the day of distress.

   ^15For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou hast
   done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon thine
   own head.

   ^16For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the heathen
   drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down,
   and they shall be as though they had not been.

   ^17But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
   holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.

   ^18And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
   flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
   them, and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the
   house of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken it.

   ^19And they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau; and they of
   the plain the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of
   Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.

   ^20And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall
   possess that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity
   of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the
   south.

   ^21And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau;
   and the kingdom shall be the Lord'S.
     __________________________________________________________________

Jonah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   Now the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,

   ^2Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their
   wickedness is come up before me.

   ^3But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the
   Lord, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so
   he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto
   Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.

   ^4But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a
   mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

   ^5Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and
   cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it
   of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he
   lay, and was fast asleep.

   ^6So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou,
   O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon
   us, that we perish not.

   ^7And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots,
   that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast
   lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

   ^8Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this
   evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what
   is thy country? and of what people art thou?

   ^9And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God
   of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land.

   ^10Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast
   thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the
   Lord, because he had told them.

   ^11Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea
   may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.

   ^12And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea;
   so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this
   great tempest is upon you.

   ^13Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land; but they
   could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.

   ^14Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O
   Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay
   not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased
   thee.

   ^15So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea
   ceased from her raging.

   ^16Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
   unto the Lord, and made vows.

   ^17Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And
   Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish's belly,

   ^2And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he
   heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.

   ^3For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas; and
   the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed
   over me.

   ^4Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward
   thy holy temple.

   ^5The waters compassed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed me
   round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.

   ^6I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars
   was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from
   corruption, O Lord my God.

   ^7When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord: and my prayer
   came in unto thee, into thine holy temple.

   ^8They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.

   ^9But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will
   pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the Lord.

   ^10And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the
   dry land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying,

   ^2Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the
   preaching that I bid thee.

   ^3So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the
   Lord. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days' journey.

   ^4And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and he cried,
   and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

   ^5So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put
   on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.

   ^6For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne,
   and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat
   in ashes.

   ^7And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by
   the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor
   beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink
   water:

   ^8But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily
   unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the
   violence that is in their hands.

   ^9Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
   fierce anger, that we perish not?

   ^10And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and
   God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them;
   and he did it not.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

   ^2And he prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not
   this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before
   unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful,
   slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

   ^3Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for it
   is better for me to die than to live.

   ^4Then said the Lord, Doest thou well to be angry?

   ^5So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city,
   and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he
   might see what would become of the city.

   ^6And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah,
   that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief.
   So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.

   ^7But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it
   smote the gourd that it withered.

   ^8And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a
   vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he
   fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is better for me to
   die than to live.

   ^9And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd? And
   he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.

   ^10Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which
   thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a
   night, and perished in a night:

   ^11And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more
   than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right
   hand and their left hand; and also much cattle?
     __________________________________________________________________

Micah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of
   Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning
   Samaria and Jerusalem.

   ^2Hear, all ye people; hearken, O earth, and all that therein is: and
   let the Lord GOD be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.

   ^3For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come
   down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

   ^4And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be
   cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a
   steep place.

   ^5For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the
   house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria?
   and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?

   ^6Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as
   plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into
   the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.

   ^7And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all
   the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols
   thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an
   harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.

   ^8Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will
   make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls.

   ^9For her wound is incurable; for it is come unto Judah; he is come
   unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.

   ^10Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of
   Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.

   ^11Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the
   inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth-ezel; he
   shall receive of you his standing.

   ^12For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good: but evil
   came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.

   ^13O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast:
   she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the
   transgressions of Israel were found in thee.

   ^14Therefore shalt thou give presents to Moresheth-gath: the houses of
   Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.

   ^15Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he
   shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.

   ^16Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy
   baldness as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when
   the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of
   their hand.

   ^2And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and
   take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his
   heritage.

   ^3Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, against this family do I
   devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks; neither
   shall ye go haughtily: for this time is evil.

   ^4In that day shall one take up a parable against you, and lament with
   a doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled: he hath changed
   the portion of my people: how hath he removed it from me! turning away
   he hath divided our fields.

   ^5Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the
   congregation of the Lord.

   ^6Prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shall not
   prophesy to them, that they shall not take shame.

   ^7O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord
   straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that
   walketh uprightly?

   ^8Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe
   with the garment from them that pass by securely as men averse from
   war.

   ^9The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses;
   from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.

   ^10Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your rest: because it is
   polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.

   ^11If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, I will
   prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the
   prophet of this people.

   ^12I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee; I will surely gather
   the remnant of Israel; I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah,
   as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great noise by
   reason of the multitude of men.

   ^13The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have
   passed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shall
   pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the
   house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment?

   ^2Who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from
   off them, and their flesh from off their bones;

   ^3Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off
   them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the
   pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

   ^4Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he will
   even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved
   themselves ill in their doings.

   ^5Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err,
   that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not
   into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.

   ^6Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision;
   and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun
   shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

   ^7Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea,
   they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.

   ^8But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of
   judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to
   Israel his sin.

   ^9Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of
   the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.

   ^10They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.

   ^11The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach
   for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean
   upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come
   upon us.

   ^12Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and
   Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high
   places of the forest.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
   house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
   it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.

   ^2And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the
   mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
   teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall
   go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

   ^3And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar
   off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears
   into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation,
   neither shall they learn war any more.

   ^4But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree;
   and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts
   hath spoken it.

   ^5For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we
   will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

   ^6In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I
   will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted;

   ^7And I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far
   off a strong nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion
   from henceforth, even for ever.

   ^8And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of
   Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom
   shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.

   ^9Now why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy
   counsellor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail.

   ^10Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a
   woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou
   shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon; there
   shalt thou be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand
   of thine enemies.

   ^11Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her
   be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.

   ^12But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they
   his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.

   ^13Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn
   iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces
   many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their
   substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath laid siege
   against us: they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the
   cheek.

   ^2But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the
   thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is
   to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from
   everlasting.

   ^3Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which
   travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall
   return unto the children of Israel.

   ^4And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the
   majesty of the name of the Lord his God; and they shall abide: for now
   shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.

   ^5And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into
   our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise
   against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.

   ^6And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land
   of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the
   Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our
   borders.

   ^7And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a
   dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for
   man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.

   ^8And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of
   many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion
   among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down,
   and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.

   ^9Thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine
   enemies shall be cut off.

   ^10And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will
   cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy
   chariots:

   ^11And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy
   strong holds:

   ^12And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand; and thou shalt
   have no more soothsayers:

   ^13Thy graven images also will I cut off, and thy standing images out
   of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine
   hands.

   ^14And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I
   destroy thy cities.

   ^15And I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen,
   such as they have not heard.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   Hear ye now what the Lord saith; Arise, contend thou before the
   mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

   ^2Hear ye, O mountains, the Lord'S controversy, and ye strong
   foundations of the earth: for the Lord hath a controversy with his
   people, and he will plead with Israel.

   ^3O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied
   thee? testify against me.

   ^4For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out
   of the house of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and
   Miriam.

   ^5O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what
   Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal; that ye
   may know the righteousness of the Lord.

   ^6Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the
   high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of
   a year old?

   ^7Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
   thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my
   transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

   ^8He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord
   require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
   humbly with thy God?

   ^9The Lord'S voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall
   see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it.

   ^10Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
   wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?

   ^11Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag
   of deceitful weights?

   ^12For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants
   thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.

   ^13Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee
   desolate because of thy sins.

   ^14Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy casting down shall be
   in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver;
   and that which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword.

   ^15Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the
   olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but
   shalt not drink wine.

   ^16For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of
   Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thee a
   desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall
   bear the reproach of my people.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as
   the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul
   desired the firstripe fruit.

   ^2The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright
   among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his
   brother with a net.

   ^3That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh,
   and the judge asketh for a reward; and the great man, he uttereth his
   mischievous desire: so they wrap it up.

   ^4The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a
   thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now
   shall be their perplexity.

   ^5Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the
   doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.

   ^6For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against
   her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man's
   enemies are the men of his own house.

   ^7Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my
   salvation: my God will hear me.

   ^8Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise;
   when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

   ^9I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
   against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he
   will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

   ^10Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her
   which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold
   her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

   ^11In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the
   decree be far removed.

   ^12In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from
   the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from
   sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

   ^13Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that
   dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.

   ^14Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which
   dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in
   Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.

   ^15According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I
   shew unto him marvellous things.

   ^16The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they
   shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.

   ^17They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of
   their holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord
   our God, and shall fear because of thee.

   ^18Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by
   the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his
   anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.

   ^19He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue
   our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of
   the sea.

   ^20Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham,
   which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.
     __________________________________________________________________

Nahum
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.

   ^2God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord revengeth, and is
   furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he
   reserveth wrath for his enemies.

   ^3The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all
   acquit the wicked: the Lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the
   storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

   ^4He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers:
   Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.

   ^5The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is
   burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.

   ^6Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
   fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the
   rocks are thrown down by him.

   ^7The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth
   them that trust in him.

   ^8But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place
   thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

   ^9What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter end:
   affliction shall not rise up the second time.

   ^10For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are
   drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.

   ^11There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the Lord,
   a wicked counsellor.

   ^12Thus saith the Lord: Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet
   thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I have
   afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.

   ^13For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy
   bonds in sunder.

   ^14And the Lord hath given a commandment concerning thee, that no more
   of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the
   graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave; for thou art
   vile.

   ^15Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good
   tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts,
   perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is
   utterly cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the
   munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power
   mightily.

   ^2For the Lord hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the
   excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and
   marred their vine branches.

   ^3The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in
   scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his
   preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken.

   ^4The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against
   another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run
   like the lightnings.

   ^5He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they
   shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be
   prepared.

   ^6The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be
   dissolved.

   ^7And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and
   her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon
   their breasts.

   ^8But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away.
   Stand, stand, shall they cry; but none shall look back.

   ^9Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is
   none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.

   ^10She is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the
   knees smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of
   them all gather blackness.

   ^11Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding place of the
   young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's
   whelp, and none made them afraid?

   ^12The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for
   his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin.

   ^13Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will burn
   her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions:
   and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy
   messengers shall no more be heard.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey
   departeth not;

   ^2The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and
   of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.

   ^3The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering
   spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of
   carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumble upon
   their corpses:

   ^4Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot,
   the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her
   whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.

   ^5Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts; and I will
   discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy
   nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.

   ^6And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and
   will set thee as a gazingstock.

   ^7And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall
   flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her?
   whence shall I seek comforters for thee?

   ^8Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers,
   that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her
   wall was from the sea?

   ^9Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put and
   Lubim were thy helpers.

   ^10Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity: her young
   children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and
   they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound
   in chains.

   ^11Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek
   strength because of the enemy.

   ^12All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the firstripe
   figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the
   eater.

   ^13Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy
   land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shall devour
   thy bars.

   ^14Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into
   clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brickkiln.

   ^15There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it
   shall eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the
   cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts.

   ^16Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the
   cankerworm spoileth, and fleeth away.

   ^17Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great
   grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the
   sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they
   are.

   ^18Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in
   the dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man
   gathereth them.

   ^19There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that
   hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom
   hath not thy wickedness passed continually?
     __________________________________________________________________

Habakkuk
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.

   ^2O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear! even cry out
   unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!

   ^3Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for
   spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife
   and contention.

   ^4Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for
   the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment
   proceedeth.

   ^5Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously: for
   I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it
   be told you.

   ^6For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation,
   which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the
   dwellingplaces that are not theirs.

   ^7They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity
   shall proceed of themselves.

   ^8Their horses also are swifter than the leopards, and are more fierce
   than the evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves,
   and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the eagle
   that hasteth to eat.

   ^9They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the
   east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.

   ^10And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn
   unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap
   dust, and take it.

   ^11Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend,
   imputing this his power unto his god.

   ^12Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One? we
   shall not die. O Lord, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O
   mighty God, thou hast established them for correction.

   ^13Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on
   iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
   holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
   righteous than he?

   ^14And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things,
   that have no ruler over them?

   ^15They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their
   net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice and are
   glad.

   ^16Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their
   drag; because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.

   ^17Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to
   slay the nations?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch
   to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am
   reproved.

   ^2And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it
   plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.

   ^3For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
   speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will
   surely come, it will not tarry.

   ^4Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the
   just shall live by his faith.

   ^5Yea also, because he transgresseth by wine, he is a proud man,
   neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his desire as hell, and is as
   death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and
   heapeth unto him all people:

   ^6Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting
   proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is
   not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!

   ^7Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that
   shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?

   ^8Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people
   shall spoil thee; because of men's blood, and for the violence of the
   land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.

   ^9Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he
   may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of
   evil!

   ^10Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people,
   and hast sinned against thy soul.

   ^11For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
   timber shall answer it.

   ^12Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city
   by iniquity!

   ^13Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts that the people shall labour
   in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very
   vanity?

   ^14For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
   Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

   ^15Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy
   bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on
   their nakedness!

   ^16Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy
   foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lord'S right hand shall be turned
   unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.

   ^17For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of
   beasts, which made them afraid, because of men's blood, and for the
   violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.

   ^18What profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven
   it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work
   trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?

   ^19Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone,
   Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver,
   and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.

   ^20But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence
   before him.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon Shigionoth.

   ^2O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy
   work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known;
   in wrath remember mercy.

   ^3God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His
   glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.

   ^4And his brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of his
   hand: and there was the hiding of his power.

   ^5Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his
   feet.

   ^6He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the
   nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual
   hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.

   ^7I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land
   of Midian did tremble.

   ^8Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against
   the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon
   thine horses and thy chariots of salvation?

   ^9Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes,
   even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.

   ^10The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the
   water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands on
   high.

   ^11The sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of
   thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.

   ^12Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh
   the heathen in anger.

   ^13Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
   salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house
   of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.

   ^14Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages:
   they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as to
   devour the poor secretly.

   ^15Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap
   of great waters.

   ^16When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice:
   rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I
   might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he
   will invade them with his troops.

   ^17Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
   the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
   yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there
   shall be no herd in the stalls:

   ^18Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
   salvation.

   ^19The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds'
   feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief
   singer on my stringed instruments.
     __________________________________________________________________

Zephaniah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the
   son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of
   Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.

   ^2I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the Lord.

   ^3I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven,
   and the fishes of the sea, and the stumblingblocks with the wicked; and
   I will cut off man from off the land, saith the Lord.

   ^4I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from
   this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests;

   ^5And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them
   that worship and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham;

   ^6And them that are turned back from the Lord; and those that have not
   sought the Lord, nor enquired for him.

   ^7Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord GOD: for the day of the
   Lord is at hand: for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid
   his guests.

   ^8And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord'S sacrifice, that I
   will punish the princes, and the king's children, and all such as are
   clothed with strange apparel.

   ^9In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
   threshold, which fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit.

   ^10And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that there
   shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the
   second, and a great crashing from the hills.

   ^11Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut
   down; all they that bear silver are cut off.

   ^12And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem
   with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees: that
   say in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.

   ^13Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a
   desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and
   they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.

   ^14The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly,
   even the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there
   bitterly.

   ^15That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of
   wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of
   clouds and thick darkness,

   ^16A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and
   against the high towers.

   ^17And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind
   men, because they have sinned against the Lord: and their blood shall
   be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.

   ^18Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in
   the day of the Lord'S wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by
   the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of
   all them that dwell in the land.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired;

   ^2Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff,
   before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of
   the Lord'S anger come upon you.

   ^3Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
   judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid
   in the day of the Lord'S anger.

   ^4For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall
   drive out Ashdod at the noonday, and Ekron shall be rooted up.

   ^5Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the
   Cherethites! the word of the Lord is against you; O Canaan, the land of
   the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no
   inhabitant.

   ^6And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and
   folds for flocks.

   ^7And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they
   shall feed thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in
   the evening: for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away
   their captivity.

   ^8I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children
   of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified
   themselves against their border.

   ^9Therefore as I live, saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
   Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah,
   even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation:
   the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people
   shall possess them.

   ^10This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached
   and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.

   ^11The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods
   of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even
   all the isles of the heathen.

   ^12Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.

   ^13And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy
   Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.

   ^14And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the
   nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the upper
   lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation shall
   be in the thresholds: for he shall uncover the cedar work.

   ^15This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her
   heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a
   desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth
   by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!

   ^2She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted
   not in the Lord; she drew not near to her God.

   ^3Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening
   wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

   ^4Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have
   polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.

   ^5The just Lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: every
   morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the
   unjust knoweth no shame.

   ^6I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; I made their
   streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are destroyed, so
   that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.

   ^7I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so
   their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but
   they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.

   ^8Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise
   up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I
   may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all
   my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of
   my jealousy.

   ^9For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all
   call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

   ^10From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter
   of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.

   ^11In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein
   thou hast transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the
   midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be
   haughty because of my holy mountain.

   ^12I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people,
   and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.

   ^13The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither
   shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed
   and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

   ^14Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with
   all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

   ^15The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine
   enemy: the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou
   shalt not see evil any more.

   ^16In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to
   Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.

   ^17The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he
   will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy
   over thee with singing.

   ^18I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who
   are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.

   ^19Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and I will
   save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will
   get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put to
   shame.

   ^20At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather
   you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the
   earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the
   Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

Haggai
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first
   day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet unto
   Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the
   son of Josedech, the high priest, saying,

   ^2Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is
   not come, the time that the Lord'S house should be built.

   ^3Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,

   ^4Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this
   house lie waste?

   ^5Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways.

   ^6Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not
   enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but
   there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it
   into a bag with holes.

   ^7Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways.

   ^8Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I
   will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord.

   ^9Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to little; and when ye brought
   it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith the Lord of hosts. Because of
   mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house.

   ^10Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is
   stayed from her fruit.

   ^11And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
   and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon
   that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle,
   and upon all the labour of the hands.

   ^12Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of
   Josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
   the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet,
   as the Lord their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the
   Lord.

   ^13Then spake Haggai the Lord'S messenger in the Lord'S message unto
   the people, saying, I am with you, saith the Lord.

   ^14And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of
   Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of
   Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
   people; and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts,
   their God,

   ^15In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year
   of Darius the king.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came
   the word of the Lord by the prophet Haggai, saying,

   ^2Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and
   to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of
   the people, saying,

   ^3Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how
   do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as
   nothing?

   ^4Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord; and be strong, O
   Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people
   of the land, saith the Lord, and work: for I am with you, saith the
   Lord of hosts:

   ^5According to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of
   Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.

   ^6For thus saith the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and
   I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;

   ^7And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
   come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^8The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^9The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former,
   saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, saith the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^10In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year
   of Darius, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,

   ^11Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ask now the priests concerning the
   law, saying,

   ^12If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his
   skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall
   it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.

   ^13Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of
   these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall
   be unclean.

   ^14Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this
   nation before me, saith the Lord; and so is every work of their hands;
   and that which they offer there is unclean.

   ^15And now, I pray you, consider from this day and upward, from before
   a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord:

   ^16Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures,
   there were but ten: when one came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty
   vessels out of the press, there were but twenty.

   ^17I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the
   labours of your hands; yet ye turned not to me, saith the Lord.

   ^18Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth
   day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the
   Lord'S temple was laid, consider it.

   ^19Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig tree,
   and the pomegranate, and the olive tree, hath not brought forth: from
   this day will I bless you.

   ^20And again the word of the Lord came unto Haggai in the four and
   twentieth day of the month, saying,

   ^21Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the
   heavens and the earth;

   ^22And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
   strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; and I will overthrow the
   chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders
   shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.

   ^23In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O
   Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the Lord, and will
   make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.
     __________________________________________________________________

Zechariah
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the
   Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet,
   saying,

   ^2The Lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers.

   ^3Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Turn ye
   unto me, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^4Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried,
   saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways,
   and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me,
   saith the Lord.

   ^5Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for
   ever?

   ^6But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the
   prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and
   said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our
   ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.

   ^7Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the
   month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord
   unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet,
   saying,

   ^8I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he
   stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom; and behind him
   were there red horses, speckled, and white.

   ^9Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked
   with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.

   ^10And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said,
   These are they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the
   earth.

   ^11And they answered the angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle
   trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and,
   behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.

   ^12Then the angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts, how
   long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah,
   against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?

   ^13And the Lord answered the angel that talked with me with good words
   and comfortable words.

   ^14So the angel that communed with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying,
   Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion
   with a great jealousy.

   ^15And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for
   I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.

   ^16Therefore thus saith the Lord; I am returned to Jerusalem with
   mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts, and a
   line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

   ^17Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; My cities through
   prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the Lord shall yet comfort
   Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

   ^18Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.

   ^19And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he
   answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel,
   and Jerusalem.

   ^20And the Lord shewed me four carpenters.

   ^21Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are
   the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his
   head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the
   Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter
   it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a
   measuring line in his hand.

   ^2Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure
   Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length
   thereof.

   ^3And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another
   angel went out to meet him,

   ^4And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem
   shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and
   cattle therein:

   ^5For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
   and will be the glory in the midst of her.

   ^6Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, saith the
   Lord: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven,
   saith the Lord.

   ^7Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.

   ^8For thus saith the Lord of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me
   unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth
   the apple of his eye.

   ^9For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a
   spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath
   sent me.

   ^10Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will
   dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord.

   ^11And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall
   be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt
   know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.

   ^12And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and
   shall choose Jerusalem again.

   ^13Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of
   his holy habitation.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of
   the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

   ^2And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the
   Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand
   plucked out of the fire?

   ^3Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the
   angel.

   ^4And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying,
   Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I
   have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee
   with change of raiment.

   ^5And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a
   fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel
   of the Lord stood by.

   ^6And the angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, saying,

   ^7Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if
   thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and
   shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among
   these that stand by.

   ^8Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit
   before thee: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring
   forth my servant the BRANCH.

   ^9For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone
   shall be seven eyes: behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith
   the Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one
   day.

   ^10In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his
   neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man
   that is wakened out of his sleep,

   ^2And said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and
   behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and
   his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are
   upon the top thereof:

   ^3And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and
   the other upon the left side thereof.

   ^4So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying,
   What are these, my lord?

   ^5Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest
   thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.

   ^6Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This is the word of the
   Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my
   spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^7Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a
   plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings,
   crying, Grace, grace unto it.

   ^8Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^9The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his
   hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts
   hath sent me unto you.

   ^10For who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall
   rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those
   seven; they are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the
   whole earth.

   ^11Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees
   upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?

   ^12And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive
   branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of
   themselves?

   ^13And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I
   said, No, my lord.

   ^14Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the
   Lord of the whole earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying
   roll.

   ^2And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying
   roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten
   cubits.

   ^3Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the
   face of the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off
   as on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be
   cut off as on that side according to it.

   ^4I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter
   into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth
   falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and
   shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.

   ^5Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift
   up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth.

   ^6And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth
   forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the
   earth.

   ^7And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a
   woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.

   ^8And he said, This is wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the
   ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

   ^9Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came out
   two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the
   wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and
   the heaven.

   ^10Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear
   the ephah?

   ^11And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and
   it shall be established, and set there upon her own base.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there
   came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains
   were mountains of brass.

   ^2In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black
   horses;

   ^3And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot
   grisled and bay horses.

   ^4Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are
   these, my lord?

   ^5And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits
   of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the
   earth.

   ^6The black horses which are therein go forth into the north country;
   and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the
   south country.

   ^7And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and
   fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro
   through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.

   ^8Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that
   go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north
   country.

   ^9And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   ^10Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of
   Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and
   go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;

   ^11Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the
   head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest;

   ^12And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying,
   Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of
   his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord:

   ^13Even he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the
   glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest
   upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

   ^14And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah,
   and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the
   Lord.

   ^15And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the
   Lord, and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you.
   And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of
   the Lord your God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of
   the Lord came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even
   in Chisleu;

   ^2When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regem-melech,
   and their men, to pray before the Lord,

   ^3And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the Lord of
   hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month,
   separating myself, as I have done these so many years?

   ^4Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying,

   ^5Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying,
   When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
   seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?

   ^6And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for
   yourselves, and drink for yourselves?

   ^7Should ye not hear the words which the Lord hath cried by the former
   prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the
   cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the
   plain?

   ^8And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying,

   ^9Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and
   shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother:

   ^10And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
   poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your
   heart.

   ^11But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
   stopped their ears, that they should not hear.

   ^12Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should
   hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts hath sent in his
   spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^13Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not
   hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the Lord of hosts:

   ^14But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom
   they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man
   passed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Again the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying,

   ^2Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great
   jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.

   ^3Thus saith the Lord; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the
   midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and
   the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain.

   ^4Thus saith the Lord of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women
   dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his
   hand for very age.

   ^5And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing
   in the streets thereof.

   ^6Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the
   remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in
   mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^7Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the
   east country, and from the west country;

   ^8And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of
   Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in
   truth and in righteousness.

   ^9Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear
   in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in
   the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid,
   that the temple might be built.

   ^10For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for
   beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in
   because of the affliction: for I set all men every one against his
   neighbour.

   ^11But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the
   former days, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^12For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and
   the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their
   dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these
   things.

   ^13And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the
   heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and
   ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.

   ^14For thus saith the Lord of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when
   your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts, and I
   repented not:

   ^15So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem and
   to the house of Judah: fear ye not.

   ^16These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye every man the truth
   to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your
   gates:

   ^17And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
   neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I
   hate, saith the Lord.

   ^18And the word of the Lord of hosts came unto me, saying,

   ^19Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the
   fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the
   tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful
   feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.

   ^20Thus saith the Lord of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that there
   shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities:

   ^21And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us
   go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I
   will go also.

   ^22Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of
   hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.

   ^23Thus saith the Lord of hosts; In those days it shall come to pass,
   that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even
   shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go
   with you: for we have heard that God is with you.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   The burden of the word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus
   shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes
   of Israel, shall be toward the Lord.

   ^2And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be
   very wise.

   ^3And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as
   the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

   ^4Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in
   the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.

   ^5Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also shall see it, and be very
   sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and the
   king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

   ^6And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of
   the Philistines.

   ^7And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations
   from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, shall be for
   our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a
   Jebusite.

   ^8And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of
   him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no
   oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have I seen with
   mine eyes.

   ^9Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem:
   behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation;
   lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.

   ^10And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from
   Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak
   peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea,
   and from river even to the ends of the earth.

   ^11As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy
   prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.

   ^12Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I
   declare that I will render double unto thee;

   ^13When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and
   raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee
   as the sword of a mighty man.

   ^14And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth
   as the lightning: and the Lord GOD shall blow the trumpet, and shall go
   with whirlwinds of the south.

   ^15The Lord of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and
   subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as
   through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners
   of the altar.

   ^16And the Lord their God shall save them in that day as the flock of
   his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an
   ensign upon his land.

   ^17For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! corn
   shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain; so the Lord
   shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one
   grass in the field.

   ^2For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie,
   and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went
   their way as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no
   shepherd.

   ^3Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the
   goats: for the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah,
   and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.

   ^4Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the
   battle bow, out of him every oppressor together.

   ^5And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in
   the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because
   the Lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

   ^6And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house
   of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy
   upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I
   am the Lord their God, and will hear them.

   ^7And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall
   rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad;
   their heart shall rejoice in the Lord.

   ^8I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and
   they shall increase as they have increased.

   ^9And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in
   far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn again.

   ^10I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather
   them out of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and
   Lebanon; and place shall not be found for them.

   ^11And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite
   the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and
   the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt
   shall depart away.

   ^12And I will strengthen them in the Lord; and they shall walk up and
   down in his name, saith the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.

   ^2Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are
   spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the forest of the vintage is
   come down.

   ^3There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is
   spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan
   is spoiled.

   ^4Thus saith the Lord my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter;

   ^5Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they
   that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich: and their own
   shepherds pity them not.

   ^6For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord:
   but, lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbour's hand,
   and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land, and out
   of their hand I will not deliver them.

   ^7And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the
   flock. And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the
   other I called Bands; and I fed the flock.

   ^8Three shepherds also I cut off in one month; and my soul lothed them,
   and their soul also abhorred me.

   ^9Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die; and
   that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat
   every one the flesh of another.

   ^10And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might
   break my covenant which I had made with all the people.

   ^11And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that
   waited upon me knew that it was the word of the Lord.

   ^12And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if
   not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

   ^13And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price
   that I was prised at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver,
   and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord.

   ^14Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands, that I might break
   the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

   ^15And the Lord said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a
   foolish shepherd.

   ^16For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not
   visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal
   that that is broken, nor feed that that standeth still: but he shall
   eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.

   ^17Woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall be
   upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up,
   and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, saith the Lord, which
   stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth,
   and formeth the spirit of man within him.

   ^2Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people
   round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and
   against Jerusalem.

   ^3And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all
   people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces,
   though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

   ^4In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every horse with
   astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes
   upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with
   blindness.

   ^5And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants
   of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.

   ^6In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire
   among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall
   devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left:
   and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
   Jerusalem.

   ^7The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of
   the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not
   magnify themselves against Judah.

   ^8In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and
   he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the
   house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.

   ^9And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy
   all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

   ^10And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall
   look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as
   one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as
   one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

   ^11In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
   mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

   ^12And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the
   house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of
   Nathan apart, and their wives apart;

   ^13The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the
   family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart;

   ^14All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives
   apart.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and
   to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.

   ^2And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that
   I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall
   no more be remembered: and also I will cause the prophets and the
   unclean spirit to pass out of the land.

   ^3And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his
   father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not
   live; for thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord: and his father
   and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he
   prophesieth.

   ^4And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be
   ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shall
   they wear a rough garment to deceive:

   ^5But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught
   me to keep cattle from my youth.

   ^6And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?
   Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my
   friends.

   ^7Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my
   fellow, saith the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep
   shall be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.

   ^8And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the Lord, two
   parts therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall be left
   therein.

   ^9And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
   them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they
   shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my
   people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in
   the midst of thee.

   ^2For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the
   city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and
   half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the
   people shall not be cut off from the city.

   ^3Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as
   when he fought in the day of battle.

   ^4And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which
   is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave
   in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there
   shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove
   toward the north, and half of it toward the south.

   ^5And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of
   the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye
   fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah:
   and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee.

   ^6And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be
   clear, nor dark:

   ^7But it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day,
   nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be
   light.

   ^8And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
   Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward
   the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.

   ^9And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall
   there be one Lord, and his name one.

   ^10All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of
   Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, from
   Benjamin's gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate,
   and from the tower of Hananeel unto the king's winepresses.

   ^11And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter
   destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.

   ^12And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the
   people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume
   away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume
   away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their
   mouth.

   ^13And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the
   Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand
   of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his
   neighbour.

   ^14And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the
   heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and
   apparel, in great abundance.

   ^15And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel,
   and of the ass, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents, as
   this plague.

   ^16And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the
   nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year
   to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of
   tabernacles.

   ^17And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of
   the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even
   upon them shall be no rain.

   ^18And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no
   rain; there shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite the
   heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

   ^19This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all
   nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.

   ^20In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS
   UNTO THE Lord; and the pots in the Lord'S house shall be like the bowls
   before the altar.

   ^21Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the
   Lord of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them,
   and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the
   Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts.
     __________________________________________________________________

Malachi
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.

   ^2I have loved you, saith the Lord. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved
   us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the Lord: yet I loved Jacob,

   ^3And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for
   the dragons of the wilderness.

   ^4Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and build
   the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall build,
   but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of
   wickedness, and, The people against whom the Lord hath indignation for
   ever.

   ^5And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified
   from the border of Israel.

   ^6A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a
   father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear?
   saith the Lord of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And
   ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?

   ^7Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we
   polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.

   ^8And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye
   offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy
   governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^9And now, I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us:
   this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the
   Lord of hosts.

   ^10Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought?
   neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure
   in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at
   your hand.

   ^11For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same
   my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense
   shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall
   be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^12But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is
   polluted; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible.

   ^13Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at
   it, saith the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and
   the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept
   this of your hand? saith the Lord.

   ^14But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and
   voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great
   King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the
   heathen.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.

   ^2If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give
   glory unto my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse
   upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them
   already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

   ^3Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces,
   even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shall take you away with
   it.

   ^4And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my
   covenant might be with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^5My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him
   for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.

   ^6The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his
   lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away
   from iniquity.

   ^7For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
   law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.

   ^8But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at
   the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of
   hosts.

   ^9Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the
   people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in
   the law.

   ^10Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do we
   deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the
   covenant of our fathers?

   ^11Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in
   Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the
   Lord which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.

   ^12The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the
   scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an
   offering unto the Lord of hosts.

   ^13And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the Lord with
   tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth
   not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your hand.

   ^14Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the Lord hath been witness between
   thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt
   treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

   ^15And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And
   wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to
   your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his
   youth.

   ^16For the Lord, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth putting away:
   for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the Lord of hosts:
   therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.

   ^17Ye have wearied the Lord with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have
   we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is good in the
   sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of
   judgment?
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
   me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even
   the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall
   come, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^2But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
   appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' sope:

   ^3And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall
   purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they
   may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

   ^4Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the
   Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.

   ^5And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift
   witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against
   false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his
   wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger
   from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^6For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
   consumed.

   ^7Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine
   ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return
   unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we
   return?

   ^8Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have
   we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

   ^9Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole
   nation.

   ^10Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat
   in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I
   will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing,
   that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

   ^11And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not
   destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her
   fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^12And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a
   delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts.

   ^13Your words have been stout against me, saith the Lord. Yet ye say,
   What have we spoken so much against thee?

   ^14Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we
   have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the
   Lord of hosts?

   ^15And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are
   set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.

   ^16Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the
   Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
   before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
   name.

   ^17And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I
   make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son
   that serveth him.

   ^18Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
   wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the
   proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day
   that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall
   leave them neither root nor branch.

   ^2But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise
   with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves
   of the stall.

   ^3And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the
   soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of
   hosts.

   ^4Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him
   in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

   ^5Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the
   great and dreadful day of the Lord:

   ^6And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the
   heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth
   with a curse.
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Apocryphal or Deuterocanonical Books
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Tobit
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   The book of the words of Tobit, son of Tobiel, the son of Ananiel, the
   son of Aduel, the son of Gabael, of the seed of Asael, of the tribe of
   Nephthali;

   ^2Who in the time of Enemessar king of the Assyrians was led captive
   out of Thisbe, which is at the right hand of that city, which is called
   properly Nephthali in Galilee above Aser.

   ^3I Tobit have walked all the days of my life in the ways of truth and
   justice, and I did many almsdeeds to my brethren, and my nation, who
   came with me to Nineve, into the land of the Assyrians.

   ^4And when I was in mine own country, in the land of Israel being but
   young, all the tribe of Nephthali my father fell from the house of
   Jerusalem, which was chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, that all
   the tribes should sacrifice there, where the temple of the habitation
   of the most High was consecrated and built for all ages.

   ^5Now all the tribes which together revolted, and the house of my
   father Nephthali, sacrificed unto the heifer Baal.

   ^6But I alone went often to Jerusalem at the feasts, as it was ordained
   unto all the people of Israel by an everlasting decree, having the
   firstfruits and tenths of increase, with that which was first shorn;
   and them gave I at the altar to the priests the children of Aaron.

   ^7The first tenth part of all increase I gave to the sons of Aaron, who
   ministered at Jerusalem: another tenth part I sold away, and went, and
   spent it every year at Jerusalem:

   ^8And the third I gave unto them to whom it was meet, as Debora my
   father's mother had commanded me, because I was left an orphan by my
   father.

   ^9Furthermore, when I was come to the age of a man, I married Anna of
   mine own kindred, and of her I begat Tobias.

   ^10And when we were carried away captives to Nineve, all my brethren
   and those that were of my kindred did eat of the bread of the Gentiles.

   ^11But I kept myself from eating;

   ^12Because I remembered God with all my heart.

   ^13And the most High gave me grace and favour before Enemessar, so that
   I was his purveyor.

   ^14And I went into Media, and left in trust with Gabael, the brother of
   Gabrias, at Rages a city of Media ten talents of silver.

   ^15Now when Enemessar was dead, Sennacherib his son reigned in his
   stead; whose estate was troubled, that I could not go into Media.

   ^16And in the time of Enemessar I gave many alms to my brethren, and
   gave my bread to the hungry,

   ^17And my clothes to the naked: and if I saw any of my nation dead, or
   cast about the walls of Nineve, I buried him.

   ^18And if the king Sennacherib had slain any, when he was come, and
   fled from Judea, I buried them privily; for in his wrath he killed
   many; but the bodies were not found, when they were sought for of the
   king.

   ^19And when one of the Ninevites went and complained of me to the king,
   that I buried them, and hid myself; understanding that I was sought for
   to be put to death, I withdrew myself for fear.

   ^20Then all my goods were forcibly taken away, neither was there any
   thing left me, beside my wife Anna and my son Tobias.

   ^21And there passed not five and fifty days, before two of his sons
   killed him, and they fled into the mountains of Ararath; and
   Sarchedonus his son reigned in his stead; who appointed over his
   father's accounts, and over all his affairs, Achiacharus my brother
   Anael's son.

   ^22And Achiacharus intreating for me, I returned to Nineve. Now
   Achiacharus was cupbearer, and keeper of the signet, and steward, and
   overseer of the accounts: and Sarchedonus appointed him next unto him:
   and he was my brother's son.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   Now when I was come home again, and my wife Anna was restored unto me,
   with my son Tobias, in the feast of Pentecost, which is the holy feast
   of the seven weeks, there was a good dinner prepared me, in the which I
   sat down to eat.

   ^2And when I saw abundance of meat, I said to my son, Go and bring what
   poor man soever thou shalt find out of our brethren, who is mindful of
   the Lord; and, lo, I tarry for thee.

   ^3But he came again, and said, Father, one of our nation is strangled,
   and is cast out in the marketplace.

   ^4Then before I had tasted of any meat, I started up, and took him up
   into a room until the going down of the sun.

   ^5Then I returned, and washed myself, and ate my meat in heaviness,

   ^6Remembering that prophecy of Amos, as he said, Your feasts shall be
   turned into mourning, and all your mirth into lamentation.

   ^7Therefore I wept: and after the going down of the sun I went and made
   a grave, and buried him.

   ^8But my neighbours mocked me, and said, This man is not yet afraid to
   be put to death for this matter: who fled away; and yet, lo, he burieth
   the dead again.

   ^9The same night also I returned from the burial, and slept by the wall
   of my courtyard, being polluted and my face was uncovered:

   ^10And I knew not that there were sparrows in the wall, and mine eyes
   being open, the sparrows muted warm dung into mine eyes, and a
   whiteness came in mine eyes: and I went to the physicians, but they
   helped me not: moreover Achiacharus did nourish me, until I went into
   Elymais.

   ^11And my wife Anna did take women's works to do.

   ^12And when she had sent them home to the owners, they paid her wages,
   and gave her also besides a kid.

   ^13And when it was in my house, and began to cry, I said unto her, From
   whence is this kid? is it not stolen? render it to the owners; for it
   is not lawful to eat any thing that is stolen.

   ^14But she replied upon me, It was given for a gift more than the
   wages. Howbeit I did not believe her, but bade her render it to the
   owners: and I was abashed at her. But she replied upon me, Where are
   thine alms and thy righteous deeds? behold, thou and all thy works are
   known.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   Then I being grieved did weep, and in my sorrow prayed, saying,

   ^2O Lord, thou art just, and all thy works and all thy ways are mercy
   and truth, and thou judgest truly and justly for ever.

   ^3Remember me, and look on me, punish me not for my sins and
   ignorances, and the sins of my fathers, who have sinned before thee:

   ^4For they obeyed not thy commandments: wherefore thou hast delivered
   us for a spoil, and unto captivity, and unto death, and for a proverb
   of reproach to all the nations among whom we are dispersed.

   ^5And now thy judgments are many and true: deal with me according to my
   sins and my fathers': because we have not kept thy commandments,
   neither have walked in truth before thee.

   ^6Now therefore deal with me as seemeth best unto thee, and command my
   spirit to be taken from me, that I may be dissolved, and become earth:
   for it is profitable for me to die rather than to live, because I have
   heard false reproaches, and have much sorrow: command therefore that I
   may now be delivered out of this distress, and go into the everlasting
   place: turn not thy face away from me.

   ^7It came to pass the same day, that in Ecbatane a city of Media Sara
   the daughter of Raguel was also reproached by her father's maids;

   ^8Because that she had been married to seven husbands, whom Asmodeus
   the evil spirit had killed, before they had lain with her. Dost thou
   not know, said they, that thou hast strangled thine husbands? thou hast
   had already seven husbands, neither wast thou named after any of them.

   ^9Wherefore dost thou beat us for them? if they be dead, go thy ways
   after them, let us never see of thee either son or daughter.

   ^10Whe she heard these things, she was very sorrowful, so that she
   thought to have strangled herself; and she said, I am the only daughter
   of my father, and if I do this, it shall be a reproach unto him, and I
   shall bring his old age with sorrow unto the grave.

   ^11Then she prayed toward the window, and said, Blessed art thou, O
   Lord my God, and thine holy and glorious name is blessed and honourable
   for ever: let all thy works praise thee for ever.

   ^12And now, O Lord, I set mine eyes and my face toward thee,

   ^13And say, Take me out of the earth, that I may hear no more the
   reproach.

   ^14Thou knowest, Lord, that I am pure from all sin with man,

   ^15And that I never polluted my name, nor the name of my father, in the
   land of my captivity: I am the only daughter of my father, neither hath
   he any child to be his heir, neither any near kinsman, nor any son of
   his alive, to whom I may keep myself for a wife: my seven husbands are
   already dead; and why should I live? but if it please not thee that I
   should die, command some regard to be had of me, and pity taken of me,
   that I hear no more reproach.

   ^16So the prayers of them both were heard before the majesty of the
   great God.

   ^17And Raphael was sent to heal them both, that is, to scale away the
   whiteness of Tobit's eyes, and to give Sara the daughter of Raguel for
   a wife to Tobias the son of Tobit; and to bind Asmodeus the evil
   spirit; because she belonged to Tobias by right of inheritance. The
   selfsame time came Tobit home, and entered into his house, and Sara the
   daughter of Raguel came down from her upper chamber.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   In that day Tobit remembered the money which he had committed to Gabael
   in Rages of Media,

   ^2And said with himself, I have wished for death; wherefore do I not
   call for my son Tobias that I may signify to him of the money before I
   die?

   ^3And when he had called him, he said, My son, when I am dead, bury me;
   and despise not thy mother, but honour her all the days of thy life,
   and do that which shall please her, and grieve her not.

   ^4Remember, my son, that she saw many dangers for thee, when thou wast
   in her womb: and when she is dead, bury her by me in one grave.

   ^5My son, be mindful of the Lord our God all thy days, and let not thy
   will be set to sin, or to transgress his commandments: do uprightly all
   thy life long, and follow not the ways of unrighteousness.

   ^6For if thou deal truly, thy doings shall prosperously succeed to
   thee, and to all them that live justly.

   ^7Give alms of thy substance; and when thou givest alms, let not thine
   eye be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor, and the face of
   God shall not be turned away from thee.

   ^8If thou hast abundance give alms accordingly: if thou have but a
   little, be not afraid to give according to that little:

   ^9For thou layest up a good treasure for thyself against the day of
   necessity.

   ^10Because that alms do deliver from death, and suffereth not to come
   into darkness.

   ^11For alms is a good gift unto all that give it in the sight of the
   most High.

   ^12Beware of all whoredom, my son, and chiefly take a wife of the seed
   of thy fathers, and take not a strange woman to wife, which is not of
   thy father's tribe: for we are the children of the prophets, Noe,
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: remember, my son, that our fathers from the
   beginning, even that they all married wives of their own kindred, and
   were blessed in their children, and their seed shall inherit the land.

   ^13Now therefore, my son, love thy brethren, and despise not in thy
   heart thy brethren, the sons and daughters of thy people, in not taking
   a wife of them: for in pride is destruction and much trouble, and in
   lewdness is decay and great want: for lewdness is the mother of famine.

   ^14Let not the wages of any man, which hath wrought for thee, tarry
   with thee, but give him it out of hand: for if thou serve God, he will
   also repay thee: be circumspect my son, in all things thou doest, and
   be wise in all thy conversation.

   ^15Do that to no man which thou hatest: drink not wine to make thee
   drunken: neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy journey.

   ^16Give of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them that
   are naked; and according to thine abundance give alms: and let not
   thine eye be envious, when thou givest alms.

   ^17Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just, but give nothing to
   the wicked.

   ^18Ask counsel of all that are wise, and despise not any counsel that
   is profitable.

   ^19Bless the Lord thy God alway, and desire of him that thy ways may be
   directed, and that all thy paths and counsels may prosper: for every
   nation hath not counsel; but the Lord himself giveth all good things,
   and he humbleth whom he will, as he will; now therefore, my son,
   remember my commandments, neither let them be put out of thy mind.

   ^20And now I signify this to they that I committed ten talents to
   Gabael the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.

   ^21And fear not, my son, that we are made poor: for thou hast much
   wealth, if thou fear God, and depart from all sin, and do that which is
   pleasing in his sight.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Tobias then answered and said, Father, I will do all things which thou
   hast commanded me:

   ^2But how can I receive the money, seeing I know him not?

   ^3Then he gave him the handwriting, and said unto him, Seek thee a man
   which may go with thee, whiles I yet live, and I will give him wages:
   and go and receive the money.

   ^4Therefore when he went to seek a man, he found Raphael that was an
   angel.

   ^5But he knew not; and he said unto him, Canst thou go with me to
   Rages? and knowest thou those places well?

   ^6To whom the angel said, I will go with thee, and I know the way well:
   for I have lodged with our brother Gabael.

   ^7Then Tobias said unto him, Tarry for me, till I tell my father.

   ^8Then he said unto him, Go and tarry not. So he went in and said to
   his father, Behold, I have found one which will go with me. Then he
   said, Call him unto me, that I may know of what tribe he is, and
   whether he be a trusty man to go with thee.

   ^9So he called him, and he came in, and they saluted one another.

   ^10Then Tobit said unto him, Brother, shew me of what tribe and family
   thou art.

   ^11To whom he said, Dost thou seek for a tribe or family, or an hired
   man to go with thy son? Then Tobit said unto him, I would know,
   brother, thy kindred and name.

   ^12Then he said, I am PrAzarias, the son of Ananias the great, and of
   thy brethren.

   ^13Then Tobit said, Thou art welcome, brother; be not now angry with
   me, because I have enquired to know thy tribe and thy family; for thou
   art my brother, of an honest and good stock: for I know Ananias and
   Jonathas, sons of that great Samaias, as we went together to Jerusalem
   to worship, and offered the firstborn, and the tenths of the fruits;
   and they were not seduced with the error of our brethren: my brother,
   thou art of a good stock.

   ^14But tell me, what wages shall I give thee? wilt thou a drachm a day,
   and things necessary, as to mine own son?

   ^15Yea, moreover, if ye return safe, I will add something to thy wages.

   ^16So they were well pleased. Then said he to Tobias, Prepare thyself
   for the journey, and God send you a good journey. And when his son had
   prepared all things for the journey, his father said, Go thou with this
   man, and God, which dwelleth in heaven, prosper your journey, and the
   angel of God keep you company. So they went forth both, and the young
   man's dog with them.

   ^17But Anna his mother wept, and said to Tobit, Why hast thou sent away
   our son? is he not the staff of our hand, in going in and out before
   us?

   ^18Be not greedy to add money to money: but let it be as refuse in
   respect of our child.

   ^19For that which the Lord hath given us to live with doth suffice us.

   ^20Then said Tobit to her, Take no care, my sister; he shall return in
   safety, and thine eyes shall see him.

   ^21For the good angel will keep him company, and his journey shall be
   prosperous, and he shall return safe.

   ^22Then she made an end of weeping.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And as they went on their journey, they came in the evening to the
   river Tigris, and they lodged there.

   ^2And when the young man went down to wash himself, a fish leaped out
   of the river, and would have devoured him.

   ^3Then the angel said unto him, Take the fish. And the young man laid
   hold of the fish, and drew it to land.

   ^4To whom the angel said, Open the fish, and take the heart and the
   liver and the gall, and put them up safely.

   ^5So the young man did as the angel commanded him; and when they had
   roasted the fish, they did eat it: then they both went on their way,
   till they drew near to Ecbatane.

   ^6Then the young man said to the angel, Brother PrAzarias, to what use
   is the heart and the liver and the gal of the fish?

   ^7And he said unto him, Touching the heart and the liver, if a devil or
   an evil spirit trouble any, we must make a smoke thereof before the man
   or the woman, and the party shall be no more vexed.

   ^8As for the gall, it is good to anoint a man that hath whiteness in
   his eyes, and he shall be healed.

   ^9And when they were come near to Rages,

   ^10The angel said to the young man, Brother, to day we shall lodge with
   Raguel, who is thy cousin; he also hath one only daughter, named Sara;
   I will speak for her, that she may be given thee for a wife.

   ^11For to thee doth the right of her appertain, seeing thou only art of
   her kindred.

   ^12And the maid is fair and wise: now therefore hear me, and I will
   speak to her father; and when we return from Rages we will celebrate
   the marriage: for I know that Raguel cannot marry her to another
   according to the law of Moses, but he shall be guilty of death, because
   the right of inheritance doth rather appertain to thee than to any
   other.

   ^13Then the young man answered the angel, I have heard, brother
   PrAzarias that this maid hath been given to seven men, who all died in
   the marriage chamber.

   ^14And now I am the only son of my father, and I am afraid, lest if I
   go in unto her, I die, as the other before: for a wicked spirit loveth
   her, which hurteth no body, but those which come unto her; wherefore I
   also fear lest I die, and bring my father's and my mother's life
   because of me to the grave with sorrow: for they have no other son to
   bury them.

   ^15Then the angel said unto him, Dost thou not remember the precepts
   which thy father gave thee, that thou shouldest marry a wife of thine
   own kindred? wherefore hear me, O my brother; for she shall be given
   thee to wife; and make thou no reckoning of the evil spirit; for this
   same night shall she be given thee in marriage.

   ^16And when thou shalt come into the marriage chamber, thou shalt take
   the ashes of perfume, and shalt lay upon them some of the heart and
   liver of the fish, and shalt make a smoke with it:

   ^17And the devil shall smell it, and flee away, and never come again
   any more: but when thou shalt come to her, rise up both of you, and
   pray to God which is merciful, who will have pity on you, and save you:
   fear not, for she is appointed unto thee from the beginning; and thou
   shalt preserve her, and she shall go with thee. Moreover I suppose that
   she shall bear thee children. Now when Tobias had heard these things,
   he loved her, and his heart was effectually joined to her.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   And when they were come to Ecbatane, they came to the house of Raguel,
   and Sara met them: and after they had saluted one another, she brought
   them into the house.

   ^2Then said Raguel to Edna his wife, How like is this young man to
   Tobit my cousin!

   ^3And Raguel asked them, From whence are ye, brethren? To whom they
   said, We are of the sons of Nephthalim, which are captives in Nineve.

   ^4Then he said to them, Do ye know Tobit our kinsman? And they said, We
   know him. Then said he, Is he in good health?

   ^5And they said, He is both alive, and in good health: and Tobias said,
   He is my father.

   ^6Then Raguel leaped up, and kissed him, and wept,

   ^7And blessed him, and said unto him, Thou art the son of an honest and
   good man. But when he had heard that Tobit was blind, he was sorrowful,
   and wept.

   ^8And likewise Edna his wife and Sara his daughter wept. Moreover they
   entertained them cheerfully; and after that they had killed a ram of
   the flock, they set store of meat on the table. Then said Tobias to
   Raphael, Brother PrAzarias, speak of those things of which thou didst
   talk in the way, and let this business be dispatched.

   ^9So he communicated the matter with Raguel: and Raguel said to Tobias,
   Eat and drink, and make merry:

   ^10For it is meet that thou shouldest marry my daughter: nevertheless I
   will declare unto thee the truth.

   ^11I have given my daughter in marriage to seven men, who died that
   night they came in unto her: nevertheless for the present be merry. But
   Tobias said, I will eat nothing here, till we agree and swear one to
   another.

   ^12Raguel said, Then take her from henceforth according to the manner,
   for thou art her cousin, and she is thine, and the merciful God give
   you good success in all things.

   ^13Then he called his daughter Sara, and she came to her father, and he
   took her by the hand, and gave her to be wife to Tobias, saying,
   Behold, take her after the law of Moses, and lead her away to thy
   father. And he blessed them;

   ^14And called Edna his wife, and took paper, and did write an
   instrument of covenants, and sealed it.

   ^15Then they began to eat.

   ^16After Raguel called his wife Edna, and said unto her, Sister,
   prepare another chamber, and bring her in thither.

   ^17Which when she had done as he had bidden her, she brought her
   thither: and she wept, and she received the tears of her daughter, and
   said unto her,

   ^18Be of good comfort, my daughter; the Lord of heaven and earth give
   thee joy for this thy sorrow: be of good comfort, my daughter.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   And when they had supped, they brought Tobias in unto her.

   ^2And as he went, he remembered the words of Raphael, and took the
   ashes of the perfumes, and put the heart and the liver of the fish
   thereupon, and made a smoke therewith.

   ^3The which smell when the evil spirit had smelled, he fled into the
   utmost parts of Egypt, and the angel bound him.

   ^4And after that they were both shut in together, Tobias rose out of
   the bed, and said, Sister, arise, and let us pray that God would have
   pity on us.

   ^5Then began Tobias to say, Blessed art thou, O God of our fathers, and
   blessed is thy holy and glorious name for ever; let the heavens bless
   thee, and all thy creatures.

   ^6Thou madest Adam, and gavest him Eve his wife for an helper and stay:
   of them came mankind: thou hast said, It is not good that man should be
   alone; let us make unto him an aid like unto himself.

   ^7And now, O Lord, I take not this my sister for lush but uprightly:
   therefore mercifully ordain that we may become aged together.

   ^8And she said with him, Amen.

   ^9So they slept both that night. And Raguel arose, and went and made a
   grave,

   ^10Saying, I fear lest he also be dead.

   ^11But when Raguel was come into his house,

   ^12He said unto his wife Edna. Send one of the maids, and let her see
   whether he be alive: if he be not, that we may bury him, and no man
   know it.

   ^13So the maid opened the door, and went in, and found them both
   asleep,

   ^14And came forth, and told them that he was alive.

   ^15Then Raguel praised God, and said, O God, thou art worthy to be
   praised with all pure and holy praise; therefore let thy saints praise
   thee with all thy creatures; and let all thine angels and thine elect
   praise thee for ever.

   ^16Thou art to be praised, for thou hast made me joyful; and that is
   not come to me which I suspected; but thou hast dealt with us according
   to thy great mercy.

   ^17Thou art to be praised because thou hast had mercy of two that were
   the only begotten children of their fathers: grant them mercy, O Lord,
   and finish their life in health with joy and mercy.

   ^18Then Raguel bade his servants to fill the grave.

   ^19And he kept the wedding feast fourteen days.

   ^20For before the days of the marriage were finished, Raguel had said
   unto him by an oath, that he should not depart till the fourteen days
   of the marriage were expired;

   ^21And then he should take the half of his goods, and go in safety to
   his father; and should have the rest when I and my wife be dead.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Then Tobias called Raphael, and said unto him,

   ^2Brother PrAzarias, take with thee a servant, and two camels, and go
   to Rages of Media to Gabael, and bring me the money, and bring him to
   the wedding.

   ^3For Raguel hath sworn that I shall not depart.

   ^4But my father counteth the days; and if I tarry long, he will be very
   sorry.

   ^5So Raphael went out, and lodged with Gabael, and gave him the
   handwriting: who brought forth bags which were sealed up, and gave them
   to him.

   ^6And early in the morning they went forth both together, and came to
   the wedding: and Tobias blessed his wife.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now Tobit his father counted every day: and when the days of the
   journey were expired, and they came not,

   ^2Then Tobit said, Are they detained? or is Gabael dead, and there is
   no man to give him the money?

   ^3Therefore he was very sorry.

   ^4Then his wife said unto him, My son is dead, seeing he stayeth long;
   and she began to wail him, and said,

   ^5Now I care for nothing, my son, since I have let thee go, the light
   of mine eyes.

   ^6To whom Tobit said, Hold thy peace, take no care, for he is safe.

   ^7But she said, Hold thy peace, and deceive me not; my son is dead. And
   she went out every day into the way which they went, and did eat no
   meat on the daytime, and ceased not whole nights to bewail her son
   Tobias, until the fourteen days of the wedding were expired, which
   Raguel had sworn that he should spend there. Then Tobias said to
   Raguel, Let me go, for my father and my mother look no more to see me.

   ^8But his father in law said unto him, Tarry with me, and I will send
   to thy father, and they shall declare unto him how things go with thee.

   ^9But Tobias said, No; but let me go to my father.

   ^10Then Raguel arose, and gave him Sara his wife, and half his goods,
   servants, and cattle, and money:

   ^11And he blessed them, and sent them away, saying, The God of heaven
   give you a prosperous journey, my children.

   ^12And he said to his daughter, Honour thy father and thy mother in
   law, which are now thy parents, that I may hear good report of thee.
   And he kissed her. Edna also said to Tobias, The Lord of heaven restore
   thee, my dear brother, and grant that I may see thy children of my
   daughter Sara before I die, that I may rejoice before the Lord: behold,
   I commit my daughter unto thee of special trust; where are do not
   entreat her evil.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   After these things Tobias went his way, praising God that he had given
   him a prosperous journey, and blessed Raguel and Edna his wife, and
   went on his way till they drew near unto Nineve.

   ^2Then Raphael said to Tobias, Thou knowest, brother, how thou didst
   leave thy father:

   ^3Let us haste before thy wife, and prepare the house.

   ^4And take in thine hand the gall of the fish. So they went their way,
   and the dog went after them.

   ^5Now Anna sat looking about toward the way for her son.

   ^6And when she espied him coming, she said to his father, Behold, thy
   son cometh, and the man that went with him.

   ^7Then said Raphael, I know, Tobias, that thy father will open his
   eyes.

   ^8Therefore anoint thou his eyes with the gall, and being pricked
   therewith, he shall rub, and the whiteness shall fall away, and he
   shall see thee.

   ^9Then Anna ran forth, and fell upon the neck of her son, and said unto
   him, Seeing I have seen thee, my son, from henceforth I am content to
   die. And they wept both.

   ^10Tobit also went forth toward the door, and stumbled: but his son ran
   unto him,

   ^11And took hold of his father: and he strake of the gall on his
   fathers' eyes, saying, Be of good hope, my father.

   ^12And when his eyes began to smart, he rubbed them;

   ^13And the whiteness pilled away from the corners of his eyes: and when
   he saw his son, he fell upon his neck.

   ^14And he wept, and said, Blessed art thou, O God, and blessed is thy
   name for ever; and blessed are all thine holy angels:

   ^15For thou hast scourged, and hast taken pity on me: for, behold, I
   see my son Tobias. And his son went in rejoicing, and told his father
   the great things that had happened to him in Media.

   ^16Then Tobit went out to meet his daughter in law at the gate of
   Nineve, rejoicing and praising God: and they which saw him go
   marvelled, because he had received his sight.

   ^17But Tobias gave thanks before them, because God had mercy on him.
   And when he came near to Sara his daughter in law, he blessed her,
   saying, Thou art welcome, daughter: God be blessed, which hath brought
   thee unto us, and blessed be thy father and thy mother. And there was
   joy among all his brethren which were at Nineve.

   ^18And Achiacharus, and Nasbas his brother's son, came:

   ^19And Tobias' wedding was kept seven days with great joy.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Then Tobit called his son Tobias, and said unto him, My son, see that
   the man have his wages, which went with thee, and thou must give him
   more.

   ^2And Tobias said unto him, O father, it is no harm to me to give him
   half of those things which I have brought:

   ^3For he hath brought me again to thee in safety, and made whole my
   wife, and brought me the money, and likewise healed thee.

   ^4Then the old man said, It is due unto him.

   ^5So he called the angel, and he said unto him, Take half of all that
   ye have brought and go away in safety.

   ^6Then he took them both apart, and said unto them, Bless God, praise
   him, and magnify him, and praise him for the things which he hath done
   unto you in the sight of all that live. It is good to praise God, and
   exalt his name, and honourably to shew forth the works of God;
   therefore be not slack to praise him.

   ^7It is good to keep close the secret of a king, but it is honourable
   to reveal the works of God. Do that which is good, and no evil shall
   touch you.

   ^8Prayer is good with fasting and alms and righteousness. A little with
   righteousness is better than much with unrighteousness. It is better to
   give alms than to lay up gold:

   ^9For alms doth deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin. Those
   that exercise alms and righteousness shall be filled with life:

   ^10But they that sin are enemies to their own life.

   ^11Surely I will keep close nothing from you. For I said, It was good
   to keep close the secret of a king, but that it was honourable to
   reveal the works of God.

   ^12Now therefore, when thou didst pray, and Sara thy daughter in law, I
   did bring the remembrance of your prayers before the Holy One: and when
   thou didst bury the dead, I was with thee likewise.

   ^13And when thou didst not delay to rise up, and leave thy dinner, to
   go and cover the dead, thy good deed was not hid from me: but I was
   with thee.

   ^14And now God hath sent me to heal thee and Sara thy daughter in law.

   ^15I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the
   prayers of the saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the
   Holy One.

   ^16Then they were both troubled, and fell upon their faces: for they
   feared.

   ^17But he said unto them, Fear not, for it shall go well with you;
   praise God therefore.

   ^18For not of any favour of mine, but by the will of our God I came;
   wherefore praise him for ever.

   ^19All these days I did appear unto you; but I did neither eat nor
   drink, but ye did see a vision.

   ^20Now therefore give God thanks: for I go up to him that sent me; but
   write all things which are done in a book.

   ^21And when they arose, they saw him no more.

   ^22Then they confessed the great and wonderful works of God, and how
   the angel of the Lord had appeared unto them.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   Then Tobit wrote a prayer of rejoicing, and said, Blessed be God that
   liveth for ever, and blessed be his kingdom.

   ^2For he doth scourge, and hath mercy: he leadeth down to hell, and
   bringeth up again: neither is there any that can avoid his hand.

   ^3Confess him before the Gentiles, ye children of Israel: for he hath
   scattered us among them.

   ^4There declare his greatness, and extol him before all the living: for
   he is our Lord, and he is the God our Father for ever.

   ^5And he will scourge us for our iniquities, and will have mercy again,
   and will gather us out of all nations, among whom he hath scattered us.

   ^6If ye turn to him with your whole heart, and with your whole mind,
   and deal uprightly before him, then will he turn unto you, and will not
   hide his face from you. Therefore see what he will do with you, and
   confess him with your whole mouth, and praise the Lord of might, and
   extol the everlasting King. In the land of my captivity do I praise
   him, and declare his might and majesty to a sinful nation. O ye
   sinners, turn and do justice before him: who can tell if he will accept
   you, and have mercy on you?

   ^7I will extol my God, and my soul shall praise the King of heaven, and
   shall rejoice in his greatness.

   ^8Let all men speak, and let all praise him for his righteousness.

   ^9O Jerusalem, the holy city, he will scourge thee for thy children's
   works, and will have mercy again on the sons of the righteous.

   ^10Give praise to the Lord, for he is good: and praise the everlasting
   King, that his tabernacle may be builded in thee again with joy, and
   let him make joyful there in thee those that are captives, and love in
   thee for ever those that are miserable.

   ^11Many nations shall come from far to the name of the Lord God with
   gifts in their hands, even gifts to the King of heaven; all generations
   shall praise thee with great joy.

   ^12Cursed are all they which hate thee, and blessed shall all be which
   love thee for ever.

   ^13Rejoice and be glad for the children of the just: for they shall be
   gathered together, and shall bless the Lord of the just.

   ^14O blessed are they which love thee, for they shall rejoice in thy
   peace: blessed are they which have been sorrowful for all thy scourges;
   for they shall rejoice for thee, when they have seen all thy glory, and
   shall be glad for ever.

   ^15Let my soul bless God the great King.

   ^16For Jerusalem shall be built up with sapphires and emeralds, and
   precious stone: thy walls and towers and battlements with pure gold.

   ^17And the streets of Jerusalem shall be paved with beryl and carbuncle
   and stones of Ophir.

   ^18And all her streets shall say, Alleluia; and they shall praise him,
   saying, Blessed be God, which hath extolled it for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   So Tobit made an end of praising God.

   ^2And he was eight and fifty years old when he lost his sight, which
   was restored to him after eight years: and he gave alms, and he
   increased in the fear of the Lord God, and praised him.

   ^3And when he was very aged he called his son, and the sons of his son,
   and said to him, My son, take thy children; for, behold, I am aged, and
   am ready to depart out of this life.

   ^4Go into Media my son, for I surely believe those things which Jonas
   the prophet spake of Nineve, that it shall be overthrown; and that for
   a time peace shall rather be in Media; and that our brethren shall lie
   scattered in the earth from that good land: and Jerusalem shall be
   desolate, and the house of God in it shall be burned, and shall be
   desolate for a time;

   ^5And that again God will have mercy on them, and bring them again into
   the land, where they shall build a temple, but not like to the first,
   until the time of that age be fulfilled; and afterward they shall
   return from all places of their captivity, and build up Jerusalem
   gloriously, and the house of God shall be built in it for ever with a
   glorious building, as the prophets have spoken thereof.

   ^6And all nations shall turn, and fear the Lord God truly, and shall
   bury their idols.

   ^7So shall all nations praise the Lord, and his people shall confess
   God, and the Lord shall exalt his people; and all those which love the
   Lord God in truth and justice shall rejoice, shewing mercy to our
   brethren.

   ^8And now, my son, depart out of Nineve, because that those things
   which the prophet Jonas spake shall surely come to pass.

   ^9But keep thou the law and the commandments, and shew thyself merciful
   and just, that it may go well with thee.

   ^10And bury me decently, and thy mother with me; but tarry no longer at
   Nineve. Remember, my son, how Aman handled Achiacharus that brought him
   up, how out of light he brought him into darkness, and how he rewarded
   him again: yet Achiacharus was saved, but the other had his reward: for
   he went down into darkness. Manasses gave alms, and escaped the snares
   of death which they had set for him: but Aman fell into the snare, and
   perished.

   ^11Wherefore now, my son, consider what alms doeth, and how
   righteousness doth deliver. When he had said these things, he gave up
   the ghost in the bed, being an hundred and eight and fifty years old;
   and he buried him honourably.

   ^12And when Anna his mother was dead, he buried her with his father.
   But Tobias departed with his wife and children to Ecbatane to Raguel
   his father in law,

   ^13Where he became old with honour, and he buried his father and mother
   in law honourably, and he inherited their substance, and his father
   Tobit's.

   ^14And he died at Ecbatane in Media, being an hundred and seven and
   twenty years old.

   ^15But before he died he heard of the destruction of Nineve, which was
   taken by Nabuchodonosor and Assuerus: and before his death he rejoiced
   over Nineve.
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Book of

Judith
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 1

   In the twelfth year of the reign of Nabuchodonosor, who reigned in
   Nineve, the great city; in the days of Arphaxad, which reigned over the
   Medes in Ecbatane,

   ^2And built in Ecbatane walls round about of stones hewn three cubits
   broad and six cubits long, and made the height of the wall seventy
   cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits:

   ^3And set the towers thereof upon the gates of it an hundred cubits
   high, and the breadth thereof in the foundation threescore cubits:

   ^4And he made the gates thereof, even gates that were raised to the
   height of seventy cubits, and the breadth of them was forty cubits, for
   the going forth of his mighty armies, and for the setting in array of
   his footmen:

   ^5Even in those days king Nabuchodonosor made war with king Arphaxad in
   the great plain, which is the plain in the borders of Ragau.

   ^6And there came unto him all they that dwelt in the hill country, and
   all that dwelt by Euphrates, and Tigris and Hydaspes, and the plain of
   Arioch the king of the Elymeans, and very many nations of the sons of
   Chelod, assembled themselves to the battle.

   ^7Then Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians sent unto all that dwelt in
   Persia, and to all that dwelt westward, and to those that dwelt in
   Cilicia, and Damascus, and Libanus, and Antilibanus, and to all that
   dwelt upon the sea coast,

   ^8And to those among the nations that were of Carmel, and Galaad, and
   the higher Galilee, and the great plain of Esdrelom,

   ^9And to all that were in Samaria and the cities thereof, and beyond
   Jordan unto Jerusalem, and Betane, and Chelus, and Kades, and the river
   of Egypt, and Taphnes, and Ramesse, and all the land of Gesem,

   ^10Until ye come beyond Tanis and Memphis, and to all the inhabitants
   of Egypt, until ye come to the borders of Ethiopia.

   ^11But all the inhabitants of the land made light of the commandment of
   Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, neither went they with him to the
   battle; for they were not afraid of him: yea, he was before them as one
   man, and they sent away his ambassadors from them without effect, and
   with disgrace.

   ^12Therefore Nabuchodonosor was very angry with all this country, and
   sware by his throne and kingdom, that he would surely be avenged upon
   all those coasts of Cilicia, and Damascus, and Syria, and that he would
   slay with the sword all the inhabitants of the land of Moab, and the
   children of Ammon, and all Judea, and all that were in Egypt, till ye
   come to the borders of the two seas.

   ^13Then he marched in battle array with his power against king Arphaxad
   in the seventeenth year, and he prevailed in his battle: for he
   overthrew all the power of Arphaxad, and all his horsemen, and all his
   chariots,

   ^14And became lord of his cities, and came unto Ecbatane, and took the
   towers, and spoiled the streets thereof, and turned the beauty thereof
   into shame.

   ^15He took also Arphaxad in the mountains of Ragau, and smote him
   through with his darts, and destroyed him utterly that day.

   ^16So he returned afterward to Nineve, both he and all his company of
   sundry nations being a very great multitude of men of war, and there he
   took his ease, and banqueted, both he and his army, an hundred and
   twenty days.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 2

   And in the eighteenth year, the two and twentieth day of the first
   month, there was talk in the house of Nabuchodonosor king of the
   Assyrians that he should, as he said, avenge himself on all the earth.

   ^2So he called unto him all his officers, and all his nobles, and
   communicated with them his secret counsel, and concluded the afflicting
   of the whole earth out of his own mouth.

   ^3Then they decreed to destroy all flesh, that did not obey the
   commandment of his mouth.

   ^4And when he had ended his counsel, Nabuchodonosor king of the
   Assyrians called Holofernes the chief captain of his army, which was
   next unto him, and said unto him.

   ^5Thus saith the great king, the lord of the whole earth, Behold, thou
   shalt go forth from my presence, and take with thee men that trust in
   their own strength, of footmen an hundred and twenty thousand; and the
   number of horses with their riders twelve thousand.

   ^6And thou shalt go against all the west country, because they
   disobeyed my commandment.

   ^7And thou shalt declare unto that they prepare for me earth and water:
   for I will go forth in my wrath against them and will cover the whole
   face of the earth with the feet of mine army, and I will give them for
   a spoil unto them:

   ^8So that their slain shall fill their valleys and brooks and the river
   shall be filled with their dead, till it overflow:

   ^9And I will lead them captives to the utmost parts of all the earth.

   ^10Thou therefore shalt go forth. and take beforehand for me all their
   coasts: and if they will yield themselves unto thee, thou shalt reserve
   them for me till the day of their punishment.

   ^11But concerning them that rebel, let not thine eye spare them; but
   put them to the slaughter, and spoil them wheresoever thou goest.

   ^12For as I live, and by the power of my kingdom, whatsoever I have
   spoken, that will I do by mine hand.

   ^13And take thou heed that thou transgress none of the commandments of
   thy lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have commanded thee, and
   defer not to do them.

   ^14Then Holofernes went forth from the presence of his lord, and called
   ail the governors and captains, and the officers of the army of Assur;

   ^15And he mustered the chosen men for the battle, as his lord had
   commanded him, unto an hundred and twenty thousand, and twelve thousand
   archers on horseback;

   ^16And he ranged them, as a great army is ordered for the war.

   ^17And he took camels and asses for their carriages, a very great
   number; and sheep and oxen and goats without number for their
   provision:

   ^18And plenty of victual for every man of the army, and very much gold
   and silver out of the king's house.

   ^19Then he went forth and all his power to go before king
   Nabuchodonosor in the voyage, and to cover all the face of the earth
   westward with their chariots, and horsemen, and their chosen footmen.

   ^20A great number also sundry countries came with them like locusts,
   and like the sand of the earth: for the multitude was without number.

   ^21And they went forth of Nineve three days' journey toward the plain
   of Bectileth, and pitched from Bectileth near the mountain which is at
   the left hand of the upper Cilicia.

   ^22Then he took all his army, his footmen, and horsemen and chariots,
   and went from thence into the hill country;

   ^23And destroyed Phud and Lud, and spoiled all the children of Rasses,
   and the children of Israel, which were toward the wilderness at the
   south of the land of the Chellians.

   ^24Then he went over Euphrates, and went through Mesopotamia, and
   destroyed all the high cities that were upon the river Arbonai, till ye
   come to the sea.

   ^25And he took the borders of Cilicia, and killed all that resisted
   him, and came to the borders of Japheth, which were toward the south,
   over against Arabia.

   ^26He compassed also all the children of Madian, and burned up their
   tabernacles, and spoiled their sheepcotes.

   ^27Then he went down into the plain of Damascus in the time of wheat
   harvest, and burnt up all their fields, and destroyed their flocks and
   herds, also he spoiled their cities, and utterly wasted their
   countries, and smote all their young men with the edge of the sword.

   ^28Therefore the fear and dread of him fell upon all the inhabitants of
   the sea coasts, which were in Sidon and Tyrus, and them that dwelt in
   Sur and Ocina, and all that dwelt in Jemnaan; and they that dwelt in
   Azotus and Ascalon feared him greatly.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 3

   So they sent ambassadors unto him to treat of peace, saying,

   ^2Behold, we the servants of Nabuchodonosor the great king lie before
   thee; use us as shall be good in thy sight.

   ^3Behold, our houses, and all our places, and all our fields of wheat,
   and flocks, and herds, and all the lodges of our tents lie before thy
   face; use them as it pleaseth thee.

   ^4Behold, even our cities and the inhabitants thereof are thy servants;
   come and deal with them as seemeth good unto thee.

   ^5So the men came to Holofernes, and declared unto him after this
   manner.

   ^6Then came he down toward the sea coast, both he and his army, and set
   garrisons in the high cities, and took out of them chosen men for aid.

   ^7So they and all the country round about received them with garlands,
   with dances, and with timbrels.

   ^8Yet he did cast down their frontiers, and cut down their groves: for
   he had decreed to destroy all the gods of the land, that all nations
   should worship Nabuchodonosor only, and that all tongues and tribes
   should call upon him as god.

   ^9Also he came over against Esdraelon near unto Judea, over against the
   great strait of Judea.

   ^10And he pitched between Geba and Scythopolis, and there he tarried a
   whole month, that he might gather together all the carriages of his
   army.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 4

   Now the children of Israel, that dwelt in Judea, heard all that
   Holofernes the chief captain of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians
   had done to the nations, and after what manner he had spoiled all their
   temples, and brought them to nought.

   ^2Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of him, and were troubled for
   Jerusalem, and for the temple of the Lord their God:

   ^3For they were newly returned from the captivity, and all the people
   of Judea were lately gathered together: and the vessels, and the altar,
   and the house, were sanctified after the profanation.

   ^4Therefore they sent into all the coasts of Samaria, and the villages
   and to Bethoron, and Belmen, and Jericho, and to Choba, and Esora, and
   to the valley of Salem:

   ^5And possessed themselves beforehand of all the tops of the high
   mountains, and fortified the villages that were in them, and laid up
   victuals for the provision of war: for their fields were of late
   reaped.

   ^6Also Joacim the high priest, which was in those days in Jerusalem,
   wrote to them that dwelt in Bethulia, and Betomestham, which is over
   against Esdraelon toward the open country, near to Dothaim,

   ^7Charging them to keep the passages of the hill country: for by them
   there was an entrance into Judea, and it was easy to stop them that
   would come up, because the passage was straight, for two men at the
   most.

   ^8And the children of Israel did as Joacim the high priest had
   commanded them, with the ancients of all the people of Israel, which
   dwelt at Jerusalem.

   ^9Then every man of Israel cried to God with great fervency, and with
   great vehemency did they humble their souls:

   ^10Both they, and their wives and their children, and their cattle, and
   every stranger and hireling, and their servants bought with money, put
   sackcloth upon their loins.

   ^11Thus every man and women, and the little children, and the
   inhabitants of Jerusalem, fell before the temple, and cast ashes upon
   their heads, and spread out their sackcloth before the face of the
   Lord: also they put sackcloth about the altar,

   ^12And cried to the God of Israel all with one consent earnestly, that
   he would not give their children for a prey, and their wives for a
   spoil, and the cities of their inheritance to destruction, and the
   sanctuary to profanation and reproach, and for the nations to rejoice
   at.

   ^13So God heard their prayers, and looked upon their afflictions: for
   the people fasted many days in all Judea and Jerusalem before the
   sanctuary of the Lord Almighty.

   ^14And Joacim the high priest, and all the priests that stood before
   the Lord, and they which ministered unto the Lord, had their loins girt
   with sackcloth, and offered the daily burnt offerings, with the vows
   and free gifts of the people,

   ^15And had ashes on their mitres, and cried unto the Lord with all
   their power, that he would look upon all the house of Israel
   graciously.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 5

   Then was it declared to Holofernes, the chief captain of the army of
   Assur, that the children of Israel had prepared for war, and had shut
   up the passages of the hill country, and had fortified all the tops of
   the high hills and had laid impediments in the champaign countries:

   ^2Wherewith he was very angry, and called all the princes of Moab, and
   the captains of Ammon, and all the governors of the sea coast,

   ^3And he said unto them, Tell me now, ye sons of Chanaan, who this
   people is, that dwelleth in the hill country, and what are the cities
   that they inhabit, and what is the multitude of their army, and wherein
   is their power and strength, and what king is set over them, or captain
   of their army;

   ^4And why have they determined not to come and meet me, more than all
   the inhabitants of the west.

   ^5Then said Achior, the captain of all the sons of Ammon, Let my lord
   now hear a word from the mouth of thy servant, and I will declare unto
   thee the truth concerning this people, which dwelleth near thee, and
   inhabiteth the hill countries: and there shall no lie come out of the
   mouth of thy servant.

   ^6This people are descended of the Chaldeans:

   ^7And they sojourned heretofore in Mesopotamia, because they would not
   follow the gods of their fathers, which were in the land of Chaldea.

   ^8For they left the way of their ancestors, and worshipped the God of
   heaven, the God whom they knew: so they cast them out from the face of
   their gods, and they fled into Mesopotamia, and sojourned there many
   days.

   ^9Then their God commanded them to depart from the place where they
   sojourned, and to go into the land of Chanaan: where they dwelt, and
   were increased with gold and silver, and with very much cattle.

   ^10But when a famine covered all the land of Chanaan, they went down
   into Egypt, and sojourned there, while they were nourished, and became
   there a great multitude, so that one could not number their nation.

   ^11Therefore the king of Egypt rose up against them, and dealt subtilly
   with them, and brought them low with labouring in brick, and made them
   slaves.

   ^12Then they cried unto their God, and he smote all the land of Egypt
   with incurable plagues: so the Egyptians cast them out of their sight.

   ^13And God dried the Red sea before them,

   ^14And brought them to mount Sina, and Cades-Barne, and cast forth all
   that dwelt in the wilderness.

   ^15So they dwelt in the land of the Amorites, and they destroyed by
   their strength all them of Esebon, and passing over Jordan they
   possessed all the hill country.

   ^16And they cast forth before them the Chanaanite, the Pherezite, the
   Jebusite, and the Sychemite, and all the Gergesites, and they dwelt in
   that country many days.

   ^17And whilst they sinned not before their God, they prospered, because
   the God that hateth iniquity was with them.

   ^18But when they departed from the way which he appointed them, they
   were destroyed in many battles very sore, and were led captives into a
   land that was not their's, and the temple of their God was cast to the
   ground, and their cities were taken by the enemies.

   ^19But now are they returned to their God, and are come up from the
   places where they were scattered, and have possessed Jerusalem, where
   their sanctuary is, and are seated in the hill country; for it was
   desolate.

   ^20Now therefore, my lord and governor, if there be any error against
   this people, and they sin against their God, let us consider that this
   shall be their ruin, and let us go up, and we shall overcome them.

   ^21But if there be no iniquity in their nation, let my lord now pass
   by, lest their Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we
   become a reproach before all the world.

   ^22And when Achior had finished these sayings, all the people standing
   round about the tent murmured, and the chief men of Holofernes, and all
   that dwelt by the sea side, and in Moab, spake that he should kill him.

   ^23For, say they, we will not be afraid of the face of the children of
   Israel: for, lo, it is a people that have no strength nor power for a
   strong battle

   ^24Now therefore, lord Holofernes, we will go up, and they shall be a
   prey to be devoured of all thine army.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 6

   And when the tumult of men that were about the council was ceased,
   Holofernes the chief captain of the army of Assur said unto Achior and
   all the Moabites before all the company of other nations,

   ^2And who art thou, Achior, and the hirelings of Ephraim, that thou
   hast prophesied against us as to day, and hast said, that we should not
   make war with the people of Israel, because their God will defend them?
   and who is God but Nabuchodonosor?

   ^3He will send his power, and will destroy them from the face of the
   earth, and their God shall not deliver them: but we his servants will
   destroy them as one man; for they are not able to sustain the power of
   our horses.

   ^4For with them we will tread them under foot, and their mountains
   shall be drunken with their blood, and their fields shall be filled
   with their dead bodies, and their footsteps shall not be able to stand
   before us, for they shall utterly perish, saith king Nabuchodonosor,
   lord of all the earth: for he said, None of my words shall be in vain.

   ^5And thou, Achior, an hireling of Ammon, which hast spoken these words
   in the day of thine iniquity, shalt see my face no more from this day,
   until I take vengeance of this nation that came out of Egypt.

   ^6And then shall the sword of mine army, and the multitude of them that
   serve me, pass through thy sides, and thou shalt fall among their
   slain, when I return.

   ^7Now therefore my servants shall bring thee back into the hill
   country, and shall set thee in one of the cities of the passages:

   ^8And thou shalt not perish, till thou be destroyed with them.

   ^9And if thou persuade thyself in thy mind that they shall be taken,
   let not thy countenance fall: I have spoken it, and none of my words
   shall be in vain.

   ^10Then Holofernes commanded his servants, that waited in his tent, to
   take Achior, and bring him to Bethulia, and deliver him into the hands
   of the children of Israel.

   ^11So his servants took him, and brought him out of the camp into the
   plain, and they went from the midst of the plain into the hill country,
   and came unto the fountains that were under Bethulia.

   ^12And when the men of the city saw them, they took up their weapons,
   and went out of the city to the top of the hill: and every man that
   used a sling kept them from coming up by casting of stones against
   them.

   ^13Nevertheless having gotten privily under the hill, they bound
   Achior, and cast him down, and left him at the foot of the hill, and
   returned to their lord.

   ^14But the Israelites descended from their city, and came unto him, and
   loosed him, and brought him to Bethulia, and presented him to the
   governors of the city:

   ^15Which were in those days Ozias the son of Micha, of the tribe of
   Simeon, and Chabris the son of Gothoniel, and Charmis the son of
   Melchiel.

   ^16And they called together all the ancients of the city, and all their
   youth ran together, and their women, to the assembly, and they set
   Achior in the midst of all their people. Then Ozias asked him of that
   which was done.

   ^17And he answered and declared unto them the words of the council of
   Holofernes, and all the words that he had spoken in the midst of the
   princes of Assur, and whatsoever Holofernes had spoken proudly against
   the house of Israel.

   ^18Then the people fell down and worshipped God, and cried unto God.
   saying,

   ^19O Lord God of heaven, behold their pride, and pity the low estate of
   our nation, and look upon the face of those that are sanctified unto
   thee this day.

   ^20Then they comforted Achior, and praised him greatly.

   ^21And Ozias took him out of the assembly unto his house, and made a
   feast to the elders; and they called on the God of Israel all that
   night for help.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 7

   The next day Holofernes commanded all his army, and all his people
   which were come to take his part, that they should remove their camp
   against Bethulia, to take aforehand the ascents of the hill country,
   and to make war against the children of Israel.

   ^2Then their strong men removed their camps in that day, and the army
   of the men of war was an hundred and seventy thousand footmen, and
   twelve thousand horsemen, beside the baggage, and other men that were
   afoot among them, a very great multitude.

   ^3And they camped in the valley near unto Bethulia, by the fountain,
   and they spread themselves in breadth over Dothaim even to Belmaim, and
   in length from Bethulia unto Cynamon, which is over against Esdraelon.

   ^4Now the children of Israel, when they saw the multitude of them, were
   greatly troubled, and said every one to his neighbour, Now will these
   men lick up the face of the earth; for neither the high mountains, nor
   the valleys, nor the hills, are able to bear their weight.

   ^5Then every man took up his weapons of war, and when they had kindled
   fires upon their towers, they remained and watched all that night.

   ^6But in the second day Holofernes brought forth all his horsemen in
   the sight of the children of Israel which were in Bethulia,

   ^7And viewed the passages up to the city, and came to the fountains of
   their waters, and took them, and set garrisons of men of war over them,
   and he himself removed toward his people.

   ^8Then came unto him all the chief of the children of Esau, and all the
   governors of the people of Moab, and the captains of the sea coast, and
   said,

   ^9Let our lord now hear a word, that there be not an overthrow in thine
   army.

   ^10For this people of the children of Israel do not trust in their
   spears, but in the height of the mountains wherein they dwell, because
   it is not easy to come up to the tops of their mountains.

   ^11Now therefore, my lord, fight not against them in battle array, and
   there shall not so much as one man of thy people perish.

   ^12Remain in thy camp, and keep all the men of thine army, and let thy
   servants get into their hands the fountain of water, which issueth
   forth of the foot of the mountain:

   ^13For all the inhabitants of Bethulia have their water thence; so
   shall thirst kill them, and they shall give up their city, and we and
   our people shall go up to the tops of the mountains that are near, and
   will camp upon them, to watch that none go out of the city.

   ^14So they and their wives and their children shall be consumed with
   fire, and before the sword come against them, they shall be overthrown
   in the streets where they dwell.

   ^15Thus shalt thou render them an evil reward; because they rebelled,
   and met not thy person peaceably.

   ^16And these words pleased Holofernes and all his servants, and he
   appointed to do as they had spoken.

   ^17So the camp of the children of Ammon departed, and with them five
   thousand of the Assyrians, and they pitched in the valley, and took the
   waters, and the fountains of the waters of the children of Israel.

   ^18Then the children of Esau went up with the children of Ammon, and
   camped in the hill country over against Dothaim: and they sent some of
   them toward the south, and toward the east over against Ekrebel, which
   is near unto Chusi, that is upon the brook Mochmur; and the rest of the
   army of the Assyrians camped in the plain, and covered the face of the
   whole land; and their tents and carriages were pitched to a very great
   multitude.

   ^19Then the children of Israel cried unto the Lord their God, because
   their heart failed, for all their enemies had compassed them round
   about, and there was no way to escape out from among them.

   ^20Thus all the company of Assur remained about them, both their
   footmen, chariots, and horsemen, four and thirty days, so that all
   their vessels of water failed all the inhibitants of Bethulia.

   ^21And the cisterns were emptied, and they had not water to drink their
   fill for one day; for they gave them drink by measure.

   ^22Therefore their young children were out of heart, and their women
   and young men fainted for thirst, and fell down in the streets of the
   city, and by the passages of the gates, and there was no longer any
   strength in them.

   ^23Then all the people assembled to Ozias, and to the chief of the
   city, both young men, and women, and children, and cried with a loud
   voice, and said before all the elders,

   ^24God be judge between us and you: for ye have done us great injury,
   in that ye have not required peace of the children of Assur.

   ^25For now we have no helper: but God hath sold us into their hands,
   that we should be thrown down before them with thirst and great
   destruction.

   ^26Now therefore call them unto you, and deliver the whole city for a
   spoil to the people of Holofernes, and to all his army.

   ^27For it is better for us to be made a spoil unto them, than to die
   for thirst: for we will be his servants, that our souls may live, and
   not see the death of our infants before our eyes, nor our wives nor our
   children to die.

   ^28We take to witness against you the heaven and the earth, and our God
   and Lord of our fathers, which punisheth us according to our sins and
   the sins of our fathers, that he do not according as we have said this
   day.

   ^29Then there was great weeping with one consent in the midst of the
   assembly; and they cried unto the Lord God with a loud voice.

   ^30Then said Ozias to them, Brethren, be of good courage, let us yet
   endure five days, in the which space the Lord our God may turn his
   mercy toward us; for he will not forsake us utterly.

   ^31And if these days pass, and there come no help unto us, I will do
   according to your word.

   ^32And he dispersed the people, every one to their own charge; and they
   went unto the walls and towers of their city, and sent the women and
   children into their houses: and they were very low brought in the city.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 8

   Now at that time Judith heard thereof, which was the daughter of
   Merari, the son of Ox, the son of Joseph, the son of Ozel, the son of
   Elcia, the son of Ananias, the son of Gedeon, the son of Raphaim, the
   son of Acitho, the son of Eliu, the son of Eliab, the son of Nathanael,
   the son of Samael, the son of Salasadal, the son of Israel.

   ^2And Manasses was her husband, of her tribe and kindred, who died in
   the barley harvest.

   ^3For as he stood overseeing them that bound sheaves in the field, the
   heat came upon his head, and he fell on his bed, and died in the city
   of Bethulia: and they buried him with his fathers in the field between
   Dothaim and Balamo.

   ^4So Judith was a widow in her house three years and four months.

   ^5And she made her a tent upon the top of her house, and put on
   sackcloth upon her loins and ware her widow's apparel.

   ^6And she fasted all the days of her widowhood, save the eves of the
   sabbaths, and the sabbaths, and the eves of the new moons, and the new
   moons and the feasts and solemn days of the house of Israel.

   ^7She was also of a goodly countenance, and very beautiful to behold:
   and her husband Manasses had left her gold, and silver, and menservants
   and maidservants, and cattle, and lands; and she remained upon them.

   ^8And there was none that gave her an ill word; ar she feared God
   greatly.

   ^9Now when she heard the evil words of the people against the governor,
   that they fainted for lack of water; for Judith had heard all the words
   that Ozias had spoken unto them, and that he had sworn to deliver the
   city unto the Assyrians after five days;

   ^10Then she sent her waitingwoman, that had the government of all
   things that she had, to call Ozias and Chabris and Charmis, the
   ancients of the city.

   ^11And they came unto her, and she said unto them, Hear me now, O ye
   governors of the inhabitants of Bethulia: for your words that ye have
   spoken before the people this day are not right, touching this oath
   which ye made and pronounced between God and you, and have promised to
   deliver the city to our enemies, unless within these days the Lord turn
   to help you.

   ^12And now who are ye that have tempted God this day, and stand instead
   of God among the children of men?

   ^13And now try the Lord Almighty, but ye shall never know any thing.

   ^14For ye cannot find the depth of the heart of man, neither can ye
   perceive the things that he thinketh: then how can ye search out God,
   that hath made all these things, and know his mind, or comprehend his
   purpose? Nay, my brethren, provoke not the Lord our God to anger.

   ^15For if he will not help us within these five days, he hath power to
   defend us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us before our
   enemies.

   ^16Do not bind the counsels of the Lord our God: for God is not as man,
   that he may be threatened; neither is he as the son of man, that he
   should be wavering.

   ^17Therefore let us wait for salvation of him, and call upon him to
   help us, and he will hear our voice, if it please him.

   ^18For there arose none in our age, neither is there any now in these
   days neither tribe, nor family, nor people, nor city among us, which
   worship gods made with hands, as hath been aforetime.

   ^19For the which cause our fathers were given to the sword, and for a
   spoil, and had a great fall before our enemies.

   ^20But we know none other god, therefore we trust that he will not
   dispise us, nor any of our nation.

   ^21For if we be taken so, all Judea shall lie waste, and our sanctuary
   shall be spoiled; and he will require the profanation thereof at our
   mouth.

   ^22And the slaughter of our brethren, and the captivity of the country,
   and the desolation of our inheritance, will he turn upon our heads
   among the Gentiles, wheresoever we shall be in bondage; and we shall be
   an offence and a reproach to all them that possess us.

   ^23For our servitude shall not be directed to favour: but the Lord our
   God shall turn it to dishonour.

   ^24Now therefore, O brethren, let us shew an example to our brethren,
   because their hearts depend upon us, and the sanctuary, and the house,
   and the altar, rest upon us.

   ^25Moreover let us give thanks to the Lord our God, which trieth us,
   even as he did our fathers.

   ^26Remember what things he did to Abraham, and how he tried Isaac, and
   what happened to Jacob in Mesopotamia of Syria, when he kept the sheep
   of Laban his mother's brother.

   ^27For he hath not tried us in the fire, as he did them, for the
   examination of their hearts, neither hath he taken vengeance on us: but
   the Lord doth scourge them that come near unto him, to admonish them.

   ^28Then said Ozias to her, All that thou hast spoken hast thou spoken
   with a good heart, and there is none that may gainsay thy words.

   ^29For this is not the first day wherein thy wisdom is manifested; but
   from the beginning of thy days all the people have known thy
   understanding, because the disposition of thine heart is good.

   ^30But the people were very thirsty, and compelled us to do unto them
   as we have spoken, and to bring an oath upon ourselves, which we will
   not break.

   ^31Therefore now pray thou for us, because thou art a godly woman, and
   the Lord will send us rain to fill our cisterns, and we shall faint no
   more.

   ^32Then said Judith unto them, Hear me, and I will do a thing, which
   shall go throughout all generations to the children of our nation.

   ^33Ye shall stand this night in the gate, and I will go forth with my
   waitingwoman: and within the days that ye have promised to deliver the
   city to our enemies the Lord will visit Israel by mine hand.

   ^34But enquire not ye of mine act: for I will not declare it unto you,
   till the things be finished that I do.

   ^35Then said Ozias and the princes unto her, Go in peace, and the Lord
   God be before thee, to take vengeance on our enemies.

   ^36So they returned from the tent, and went to their wards.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 9

   Judith fell upon her face, and put ashes upon her head, and uncovered
   the sackcloth wherewith she was clothed; and about the time that the
   incense of that evening was offered in Jerusalem in the house of the
   Lord Judith cried with a loud voice, and said,

   ^2O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom thou gavest a sword to take
   vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the girdle of a maid to defile
   her, and discovered the thigh to her shame, and polluted her virginity
   to her reproach; for thou saidst, It shall not be so; and yet they did
   so:

   ^3Wherefore thou gavest their rulers to be slain, so that they dyed
   their bed in blood, being deceived, and smotest the servants with their
   lords, and the lords upon their thrones;

   ^4And hast given their wives for a prey, and their daughters to be
   captives, and all their spoils to be divided among thy dear children;
   which were moved with thy zeal, and abhorred the pollution of their
   blood, and called upon thee for aid: O God, O my God, hear me also a
   widow.

   ^5For thou hast wrought not only those things, but also the things
   which fell out before, and which ensued after; thou hast thought upon
   the things which are now, and which are to come.

   ^6Yea, what things thou didst determine were ready at hand, and said,
   Lo, we are here: for all thy ways are prepared, and thy judgments are
   in thy foreknowledge.

   ^7For, behold, the Assyrians are multiplied in their power; they are
   exalted with horse and man; they glory in the strength of their
   footmen; they trust in shield, and spear, and bow, and sling; and know
   not that thou art the Lord that breakest the battles: the Lord is thy
   name.

   ^8Throw down their strength in thy power, and bring down their force in
   thy wrath: for they have purposed to defile thy sanctuary, and to
   pollute the tabernacle where thy glorious name resteth and to cast down
   with sword the horn of thy altar.

   ^9Behold their pride, and send thy wrath upon their heads: give into
   mine hand, which am a widow, the power that I have conceived.

   ^10Smite by the deceit of my lips the servant with the prince, and the
   prince with the servant: break down their stateliness by the hand of a
   woman.

   ^11For thy power standeth not in multitude nor thy might in strong men:
   for thou art a God of the afflicted, an helper of the oppressed, an
   upholder of the weak, a protector of the forlorn, a saviour of them
   that are without hope.

   ^12I pray thee, I pray thee, O God of my father, and God of the
   inheritance of Israel, Lord of the heavens and earth, Creator of the
   waters, king of every creature, hear thou my prayer:

   ^13And make my speech and deceit to be their wound and stripe, who have
   purposed cruel things against thy covenant, and thy hallowed house, and
   against the top of Sion, and against the house of the possession of thy
   children.

   ^14And make every nation and tribe to acknowledge that thou art the God
   of all power and might, and that there is none other that protecteth
   the people of Israel but thou.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 10

   Now after that she had ceased to cry unto the God of Israel, and bad
   made an end of all these words.

   ^2She rose where she had fallen down, and called her maid, and went
   down into the house in the which she abode in the sabbath days, and in
   her feast days,

   ^3And pulled off the sackcloth which she had on, and put off the
   garments of her widowhood, and washed her body all over with water, and
   anointed herself with precious ointment, and braided the hair of her
   head, and put on a tire upon it, and put on her garments of gladness,
   wherewith she was clad during the life of Manasses her husband.

   ^4And she took sandals upon her feet, and put about her her bracelets,
   and her chains, and her rings, and her earrings, and all her ornaments,
   and decked herself bravely, to allure the eyes of all men that should
   see her.

   ^5Then she gave her maid a bottle of wine, and a cruse of oil, and
   filled a bag with parched corn, and lumps of figs, and with fine bread;
   so she folded all these things together, and laid them upon her.

   ^6Thus they went forth to the gate of the city of Bethulia, and found
   standing there Ozias and the ancients of the city, Chabris and Charmis.

   ^7And when they saw her, that her countenance was altered, and her
   apparel was changed, they wondered at her beauty very greatly, and said
   unto her.

   ^8The God, the God of our fathers give thee favour, and accomplish
   thine enterprizes to the glory of the children of Israel, and to the
   exaltation of Jerusalem. Then they worshipped God.

   ^9And she said unto them, Command the gates of the city to be opened
   unto me, that I may go forth to accomplish the things whereof ye have
   spoken with me. So they commanded the young men to open unto her, as
   she had spoken.

   ^10And when they had done so, Judith went out, she, and her maid with
   her; and the men of the city looked after her, until she was gone down
   the mountain, and till she had passed the valley, and could see her no
   more.

   ^11Thus they went straight forth in the valley: and the first watch of
   the Assyrians met her,

   ^12And took her, and asked her, Of what people art thou? and whence
   comest thou? and whither goest thou? And she said, I am a woman of the
   Hebrews, and am fled from them: for they shall be given you to be
   consumed:

   ^13And I am coming before Holofernes the chief captain of your army, to
   declare words of truth; and I will shew him a way, whereby he shall go,
   and win all the hill country, without losing the body or life of any
   one of his men.

   ^14Now when the men heard her words, and beheld her countenance, they
   wondered greatly at her beauty, and said unto her,

   ^15Thou hast saved thy life, in that thou hast hasted to come down to
   the presence of our lord: now therefore come to his tent, and some of
   us shall conduct thee, until they have delivered thee to his hands.

   ^16And when thou standest before him, be not afraid in thine heart, but
   shew unto him according to thy word; and he will entreat thee well.

   ^17Then they chose out of them an hundred men to accompany her and her
   maid; and they brought her to the tent of Holofernes.

   ^18Then was there a concourse throughout all the camp: for her coming
   was noised among the tents, and they came about her, as she stood
   without the tent of Holofernes, till they told him of her.

   ^19And they wondered at her beauty, and admired the children of Israel
   because of her, and every one said to his neighbour, Who would despise
   this people, that have among them such women? surely it is not good
   that one man of them be left who being let go might deceive the whole
   earth.

   ^20And they that lay near Holofernes went out, and all his servants and
   they brought her into the tent.

   ^21Now Holofernes rested upon his bed under a canopy, which was woven
   with purple, and gold, and emeralds, and precious stones.

   ^22So they shewed him of her; and he came out before his tent with
   silver lamps going before him.

   ^23And when Judith was come before him and his servants they all
   marvelled at the beauty of her countenance; and she fell down upon her
   face, and did reverence unto him: and his servants took her up.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 11

   Then said Holofernes unto her, Woman, be of good comfort, fear not in
   thine heart: for I never hurt any that was willing to serve
   Nabuchodonosor, the king of all the earth.

   ^2Now therefore, if thy people that dwelleth in the mountains had not
   set light by me, I would not have lifted up my spear against them: but
   they have done these things to themselves.

   ^3But now tell me wherefore thou art fled from them, and art come unto
   us: for thou art come for safeguard; be of good comfort, thou shalt
   live this night, and hereafter:

   ^4For none shall hurt thee, but entreat thee well, as they do the
   servants of king Nabuchodonosor my lord.

   ^5Then Judith said unto him, Receive the words of thy servant, and
   suffer thine handmaid to speak in thy presence, and I will declare no
   lie to my lord this night.

   ^6And if thou wilt follow the words of thine handmaid, God will bring
   the thing perfectly to pass by thee; and my lord shall not fail of his
   purposes.

   ^7As Nabuchodonosor king of all the earth liveth, and as his power
   liveth, who hath sent thee for the upholding of every living thing: for
   not only men shall serve him by thee, but also the beasts of the field,
   and the cattle, and the fowls of the air, shall live by thy power under
   Nabuchodonosor and all his house.

   ^8For we have heard of thy wisdom and thy policies, and it is reported
   in all the earth, that thou only art excellent in all the kingdom, and
   mighty in knowledge, and wonderful in feats of war.

   ^9Now as concerning the matter, which Achior did speak in thy council,
   we have heard his words; for the men of Bethulia saved him, and he
   declared unto them all that he had spoken unto thee.

   ^10Therefore, O lord and governor, respect not his word; but lay it up
   in thine heart, for it is true: for our nation shall not be punished,
   neither can sword prevail against them, except they sin against their
   God.

   ^11And now, that my lord be not defeated and frustrate of his purpose,
   even death is now fallen upon them, and their sin hath overtaken them,
   wherewith they will provoke their God to anger whensoever they shall do
   that which is not fit to be done:

   ^12For their victuals fail them, and all their water is scant, and they
   have determined to lay hands upon their cattle, and purposed to consume
   all those things, that God hath forbidden them to eat by his laws:

   ^13And are resolved to spend the firstfruits of the the tenths of wine
   and oil, which they had sanctified, and reserved for the priests that
   serve in Jerusalem before the face of our God; the which things it is
   not lawful for any of the people so much as to touch with their hands.

   ^14For they have sent some to Jerusalem, because they also that dwell
   there have done the like, to bring them a licence from the senate.

   ^15Now when they shall bring them word, they will forthwith do it, and
   they shall be given to thee to be destroyed the same day.

   ^16Wherefore I thine handmaid, knowing all this, am fled from their
   presence; and God hath sent me to work things with thee, whereat all
   the earth shall be astonished, and whosoever shall hear it.

   ^17For thy servant is religious, and serveth the God of heaven day and
   night: now therefore, my lord, I will remain with thee, and thy servant
   will go out by night into the valley, and I will pray unto God, and he
   will tell me when they have committed their sins:

   ^18And I will come and shew it unto thee: then thou shalt go forth with
   all thine army, and there shall be none of them that shall resist thee.

   ^19And I will lead thee through the midst of Judea, until thou come
   before Jerusalem; and I will set thy throne in the midst thereof; and
   thou shalt drive them as sheep that have no shepherd, and a dog shall
   not so much as open his mouth at thee: for these things were told me
   according to my foreknowledge, and they were declared unto me, and I am
   sent to tell thee.

   ^20Then her words pleased Holofernes and all his servants; and they
   marvelled at her wisdom, and said,

   ^21There is not such a woman from one end of the earth to the other,
   both for beauty of face, and wisdom of words.

   ^22Likewise Holofernes said unto her. God hath done well to send thee
   before the people, that strength might be in our hands and destruction
   upon them that lightly regard my lord.

   ^23And now thou art both beautiful in thy countenance, and witty in thy
   words: surely if thou do as thou hast spoken thy God shall be my God,
   and thou shalt dwell in the house of king Nabuchodonosor, and shalt be
   renowned through the whole earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 12

   Then he commanded to bring her in where his plate was set; and bade
   that they should prepare for her of his own meats, and that she should
   drink of his own wine.

   ^2And Judith said, I will not eat thereof, lest there be an offence:
   but provision shall be made for me of the things that I have brought.

   ^3Then Holofernes said unto her, If thy provision should fail, how
   should we give thee the like? for there be none with us of thy nation.

   ^4Then said Judith unto him As thy soul liveth, my lord, thine handmaid
   shall not spend those things that I have, before the Lord work by mine
   hand the things that he hath determined.

   ^5Then the servants of Holofernes brought her into the tent, and she
   slept till midnight, and she arose when it was toward the morning
   watch,

   ^6And sent to Holofernes, saving, Let my lord now command that thine
   handmaid may go forth unto prayer.

   ^7Then Holofernes commanded his guard that they should not stay her:
   thus she abode in the camp three days, and went out in the night into
   the valley of Bethulia, and washed herself in a fountain of water by
   the camp.

   ^8And when she came out, she besought the Lord God of Israel to direct
   her way to the raising up of the children of her people.

   ^9So she came in clean, and remained in the tent, until she did eat her
   meat at evening.

   ^10And in the fourth day Holofernes made a feast to his own servants
   only, and called none of the officers to the banquet.

   ^11Then said he to Bagoas the eunuch, who had charge over all that he
   had, Go now, and persuade this Hebrew woman which is with thee, that
   she come unto us, and eat and drink with us.

   ^12For, lo, it will be a shame for our person, if we shall let such a
   woman go, not having had her company; for if we draw her not unto us,
   she will laugh us to scorn.

   ^13Then went Bagoas from the presence of Holofernes, and came to her,
   and he said, Let not this fair damsel fear to come to my lord, and to
   be honoured in his presence, and drink wine, and be merry with us and
   be made this day as one of the daughters of the Assyrians, which serve
   in the house of Nabuchodonosor.

   ^14Then said Judith unto him, Who am I now, that I should gainsay my
   lord? surely whatsoever pleaseth him I will do speedily, and it shall
   be my joy unto the day of my death.

   ^15So she arose, and decked herself with her apparel and all her
   woman's attire, and her maid went and laid soft skins on the ground for
   her over against Holofernes, which she had received of Bagoas far her
   daily use, that she might sit and eat upon them.

   ^16Now when Judith came in and sat down, Holofernes his heart was
   ravished with her, and his mind was moved, and he desired greatly her
   company; for he waited a time to deceive her, from the day that he had
   seen her.

   ^17Then said Holofernes unto her, Drink now, and be merry with us.

   ^18So Judith said, I will drink now, my lord, because my life is
   magnified in me this day more than all the days since I was born.

   ^19Then she took and ate and drank before him what her maid had
   prepared.

   ^20And Holofernes took great delight in her, and drank more wine than
   he had drunk at any time in one day since he was born.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 13

   Now when the evening was come, his servants made haste to depart, and
   Bagoas shut his tent without, and dismissed the waiters from the
   presence of his lord; and they went to their beds: for they were all
   weary, because the feast had been long.

   ^2And Judith was left along in the tent, and Holofernes lying along
   upon his bed: for he was filled with wine.

   ^3Now Judith had commanded her maid to stand without her bedchamber,
   and to wait for her. coming forth, as she did daily: for she said she
   would go forth to her prayers, and she spake to Bagoas according to the
   same purpose.

   ^4So all went forth and none was left in the bedchamber, neither little
   nor great. Then Judith, standing by his bed, said in her heart, O Lord
   God of all power, look at this present upon the works of mine hands for
   the exaltation of Jerusalem.

   ^5For now is the time to help thine inheritance, and to execute thine
   enterprizes to the destruction of the enemies which are risen against
   us.

   ^6Then she came to the pillar of the bed, which was at Holofernes'
   head, and took down his fauchion from thence,

   ^7And approached to his bed, and took hold of the hair of his head, and
   said, Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, this day.

   ^8And she smote twice upon his neck with all her might, and she took
   away his head from him.

   ^9And tumbled his body down from the bed, and pulled down the canopy
   from the pillars; and anon after she went forth, and gave Holofernes
   his head to her maid;

   ^10And she put it in her bag of meat: so they twain went together
   according to their custom unto prayer: and when they passed the camp,
   they compassed the valley, and went up the mountain of Bethulia, and
   came to the gates thereof.

   ^11Then said Judith afar off, to the watchmen at the gate, Open, open
   now the gate: God, even our God, is with us, to shew his power yet in
   Jerusalem, and his forces against the enemy, as he hath even done this
   day.

   ^12Now when the men of her city heard her voice, they made haste to go
   down to the gate of their city, and they called the elders of the city.

   ^13And then they ran all together, both small and great, for it was
   strange unto them that she was come: so they opened the gate, and
   received them, and made a fire for a light, and stood round about them.

   ^14Then she said to them with a loud voice, Praise, praise God, praise
   God, I say, for he hath not taken away his mercy from the house of
   Israel, but hath destroyed our enemies by mine hands this night.

   ^15So she took the head out of the bag, and shewed it, and said unto
   them, behold the head of Holofernes, the chief captain of the army of
   Assur, and behold the canopy, wherein he did lie in his drunkenness;
   and the Lord hath smitten him by the hand of a woman.

   ^16As the Lord liveth, who hath kept me in my way that I went, my
   countenance hath deceived him to his destruction, and yet hath he not
   committed sin with me, to defile and shame me.

   ^17Then all the people were wonderfully astonished, and bowed
   themselves and worshipped God, and said with one accord, Blessed be
   thou, O our God, which hast this day brought to nought the enemies of
   thy people.

   ^18Then said Ozias unto her, O daughter, blessed art thou of the most
   high God above all the women upon the earth; and blessed be the Lord
   God, which hath created the heavens and the earth, which hath directed
   thee to the cutting off of the head of the chief of our enemies.

   ^19For this thy confidence shall not depart from the heart of men,
   which remember the power of God for ever.

   ^20And God turn these things to thee for a perpetual praise, to visit
   thee in good things because thou hast not spared thy life for the
   affliction of our nation, but hast revenged our ruin, walking a
   straight way before our God. And all the people said; So be it, so be
   it.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 14

   Then said Judith unto them, Hear me now, my brethren, and take this
   head, and hang it upon the highest place of your walls.

   ^2And so soon as the morning shall appear, and the sun shall come forth
   upon the earth, take ye every one his weapons, and go forth every
   valiant man out of the city, and set ye a captain over them, as though
   ye would go down into the field toward the watch of the Assyrians; but
   go not down.

   ^3Then they shall take their armour, and shall go into their camp, and
   raise up the captains of the army of Assur, and shall run to the tent
   of Holofernes, but shall not find him: then fear shall fall upon them,
   and they shall flee before your face.

   ^4So ye, and all that inhabit the coast of Israel, shall pursue them,
   and overthrow them as they go.

   ^5But before ye do these things, call me Achior the Ammonite, that he
   may see and know him that despised the house of Israel, and that sent
   him to us as it were to his death.

   ^6Then they called Achior out of the house of Ozias; and when he was
   come, and saw the head of Holofernes in a man's hand in the assembly of
   the people, he fell down on his face, and his spirit failed.

   ^7But when they had recovered him, he fell at Judith's feet, and
   reverenced her, and said, Blessed art thou in all the tabernacles of
   Juda, and in all nations, which hearing thy name shall be astonished.

   ^8Now therefore tell me all the things that thou hast done in these
   days. Then Judith declared unto him in the midst of the people all that
   she had done, from the day that she went forth until that hour she
   spake unto them.

   ^9And when she had left off speaking, the people shouted with a loud
   voice, and made a joyful noise in their city.

   ^10And when Achior had seen all that the God of Israel had done, he
   believed in God greatly, and circumcised the flesh of his foreskin, and
   was joined unto the house of Israel unto this day.

   ^11And as soon as the morning arose, they hanged the head of Holofernes
   upon the wall, and every man took his weapons, and they went forth by
   bands unto the straits of the mountain.

   ^12But when the Assyrians saw them, they sent to their leaders, which
   came to their captains and tribunes, and to every one of their rulers.

   ^13So they came to Holofernes' tent, and said to him that had the
   charge of all his things, Waken now our lord: for the slaves have been
   bold to come down against us to battle, that they may be utterly
   destroyed.

   ^14Then went in Bagoas, and knocked at the door of the tent; for he
   thought that he had slept with Judith.

   ^15But because none answered, he opened it, and went into the
   bedchamber, and found him cast upon the floor dead, and his head was
   taken from him.

   ^16Therefore he cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and sighing, and
   a mighty cry, and rent his garments.

   ^17After he went into the tent where Judith lodged: and when he found
   her not, he leaped out to the people, and cried,

   ^18These slaves have dealt treacherously; one woman of the Hebrews hath
   brought shame upon the house of king Nabuchodonosor: for, behold,
   Holofernes lieth upon the ground without a head.

   ^19When the captains of the Assyrians' army heard these words, they
   rent their coats and their minds were wonderfully troubled, and there
   was a cry and a very great noise throughout the camp.
     __________________________________________________________________

    Chapter 15

   And when they that were in the tents heard, they were astonished at the
   thing that was done.

   ^2And fear and trembling fell upon them, so that there was no man that
   durst abide in the sight of his neighbour, but rushing out all
   together, they fled into every way of the plain, and of the hill
   country.

   ^3They also that had camped in the mountains round about Bethulia fled
   away. Then the children of Israel, every one that was a warrior among
   them, rushed out upon them.

   ^4Then sent Ozias to Betomasthem, and to Bebai, and Chobai, and Cola
   and to all the coasts of Israel, such as should tell the things that
   were done, and that all should rush forth upon their enemies to destroy
   them.

   ^5Now when the children of Israel heard it, they all fell upon them
   with one consent, and slew them unto Chobai: likewise also they that
   came from Jerusalem, and from all the hill country, (for men had told
   them what things were done in the camp of their enemies) and they that
   were in Galaad, and in Galilee, chased them with a great slaughter,
   until they were past Damascus and the borders thereof.

   ^6And the residue that dwelt at Bethulia, fell upon the camp of Assur,
   and spoiled them, and were greatly enriched.

   ^7And the children of Israel that returned from the slaughter had that
   which
